344
 
DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES
Powers of the Federation ? The answer is no. The Federal Legislative List 
remains the same whether the Federation that is in operation is British India 
Federation or the All-India Federation. The Concurrent list also remains the 
same whether the Federation in operation is one or the other.
Is there any difference in Financial Powers ? The answer again is no.
The Powers of taxation remain the same whether it is an All-India 
Federation or British India Federation.
Is there any change in the Judicial organization of the Federation ? There 
is none. Federal Court is as much necessary for the All-India Federation as 
for British India Federation.
How do these two Federations differ ? The two differ in one respect only. 
To find out this difference you should compare section 313 with section 8. 
The comparison will show that if the Federation is a British India Federation 
the Executive Authority of the Federation will be the Governor-General 
in Council and if the federation is an All-India Federation the Executive 
Authority in transferred matters to be the Governor-General acting on the 
advice of Ministers responsible to the Legislature. In other words while there 
is British India Federation only there is no responsibility at the Centre so 
long as there is no All-India Federation.
This means that the entry of the States is a condition precedent for the 
grant of responsibility to British India. You will therefore ask, why is the 
entry of the States so essential ?
All Federations have come into existence as a result of some danger from 
outside affecting the safety and integrity of the Units. The States of North 
America federated because of the fear of subjugation of the States by British 
Imperialism. The Provinces of Canada federated because of the danger 
of invasion or absorption by the United States. The Australian Colonies 
federated because of the danger of invasion by Japan. It is obvious that 
the Indian Federation is not the result of any such circumstance. There is 
no new invader on the border of India waiting to pounce upon both British 
India and the Indian States. Nor is this Federation necessary for bringing 
about peace between British India and the Indian States. It matters not 
that British India is under the sovereignty of the Crown and the Indian 
States are under the suzerainty of the Crown. So far as foreign relations 
are concerned, and they include peace and war, the two are subordinate 
to one and the same authority namely the crown. That is the reason why 
the two have been at peace. That is the reason why they will not be and 
cannot be at war. Prevention of external aggression or the maintenance of 
internal peace cannot be the motive for this All India Federation. What 
then can be the motive of this Federation ? Why are the States invited to 
enter into this Federation ? Why is their entry made a condition precedent 
for responsibility at the Centre ? To put it bluntly,
