261
 
EVIDENCE BEFORE THE SOUTHBOROUGH COMMITTEE
These 9 elected members should form a constituency to elect one member 
from among themselves to represent the untouchables of this Presidency in 
the Imperial Legislative Council.
28. It may be objected that though 8 representatives are not in excess 
to the untouchable population it may be in excess to the voting strength of 
untouchables. That the untouchables are a poor community and that under 
the same franchise they yield per thousand a smaller proportion of voters 
than other communities is a fact. But if the grave position of the untouchables 
is admitted instead of restricting their number of representatives, the aim 
should be to increase the number of their voters, i.e., we must aim at lowering 
the franchise so far as the untouchables are concerned.
29. What the franchise should be is a very important question. There 
is a line of argument which urges that franchise should be given to those 
only who can be expected to make an intelligent use of it. As against this 
view it can be said in the words of Prof. L. T. Hobhouse that it is true 
that “the success of democracy depends on the response of voters to the 
opportunities given them. But conversely the opportunities must be given 
in order to call forth the response. The exercise of popular Government is 
itself all education ... enfranchisement itself may precisely be the stimulus 
needed to awaken interest. The ballot alone effectively liberates the quiet 
citizen from the tyranny of the shouter and the wire-puller. An impression of 
existing inertness alone is not a sufficient reason for with-holding responsible 
Government or restricting the area of sufferage.” Taking into consideration 
that sufferage is an education and that there are groups with unequal 
distribution of wealth and education among them and that these groups are 
not sympathetically like-minded, the authors of the reports rightly argue 
that the case for uniformity of franchise cannot be sustained.
30. But in the case of the untouchables there are as few reasons for 
curtailing the number of their representatives as the reasons for widening 
their electorate are many. If under a given franchise the untouchables do 
not muster strong as electors, it is not their fault. The very untouchability 
attached to their person is a bar to their moral and material progress. The 
principal modes of acquiring wealth are trade, industry or service. The 
untouchables can engage in none of these because of their untouchability. 
From an untouchable trader no Hindu will buy. An untouchable cannot 
be engaged in lucrative service. Military service had been the monopoly 
of the untouchables since the days of the East India Company. They had 
joined the Army in such large numbers that the Marquis Tweedledale in 
his note which he submitted to the Indian Army Commission of 1859 wrote, 
“It should never be forgotten that India was conquered with the help of 
the low-caste men.”. But after the mutiny when the British were able to 
secure soldiers from the ranks of the Marathas, the position of the low-caste 
men who had been the prop of the Bombay Army became precarious, not
