331
 
FEDERATION VERSUS FREEDOM
in the way. They contend that if India has no hope of Dominion Status, it 
is because the British Parliament refused to grant it. In support of their 
opinion they refer to the refusal of The British Parliament to add a Preamble 
to the Act of 1935 declaring Dominion Status as the goal for India.
It must be granted that the demand for such a preamble was a very 
proper one. In 1929 Lord Irwin with the consent of all the political parties 
in the British Parliament declared that the goal of India’s political evolution 
was Dominion Status. What the Indians therefore wanted was not new. It 
had already been so stated authoritatively by the Governor-General and 
Viceroy, but the British Government refused to put such a preamble. The 
refusal was therefore a strange piece of conduct on the part of the British 
Government. But the grounds urged in support of the refusal were stranger 
still. The British Government sought to justify their conduct in not having 
a preamble in those terms on various grounds.
The first ground was that a preamble was a futility and that it had no 
operative force, but that argument was easily met. All Acts of Parliament 
have had Preambles expressing the purpose and the intention of Parliament. 
It is true that it has no legal effect, but all the same Courts have not held 
that a preamble is a futile thing. On the other hand, wherever there is any 
doubt with regard to the wording of a section, Courts have always resorted to 
the preamble as a key to understand the purpose of the enactment and made 
use of it for resolving any doubtful construction. Driven from this position, 
the British Government took another position and that was to repeal the Act 
of 1919 but to retain the Preamble to that Act. This again is a very queer 
thing. In the first place if the Preamble is a futility, there is no necessity 
to save the Preamble enacted as part of the Act of 1919. Secondly if the 
Preamble to the Act of 1919 was a necessity, it should have been enacted 
afresh as a part of this Act of 1935, which the British Government would 
not do. Instead it preferred to present the strange spectacle of the head 
separated from the trunk. The head is now to be found in the repealed Act 
of 1919 and the trunk is to be found in the present enactment of 1935. In 
the third place, what the Indian people wanted was a preamble promising 
Dominion Status and that is what the declaration of Lord Irwin contained. 
The preamble to the Act of 1919 speaks only of Responsible Government. 
It does not speak of Dominion Status and the retention of the Preamble to 
the Act of 1919 was to say the least the silliest business possible.
Why did the British Parliament refuse to enact a Preamble defining 
Dominion Status as the goal ? Why did the British Parliament run from 
pillar to post rather than grant the demand ? The explanation offered is 
of course the usual one namely, the perfidy of the Albion ! My own view 
is different. The British Parliament did not promise Dominion Status by
