366
 
DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES
IV
NECESSITY OF A NEW APPROACH
I shall be asked that if the Constituent Assembly is not the correct 
approach, what is the alternative ? I know I shall be confronted with such 
a question. But I am confident in my view that if the Communal Question 
has become difficult of solution it is not because it is insoluble, nor because 
we had not yet employed the machinery of Constituent Assembly. It has 
become insoluble because the approach to it is fundamentally wrong. The 
defect in the present approach is that it proceeds by methods instead of 
by principles. The principle is that there is no principle. There is only a 
series of methods. If one method fails another is tried. It is this swing from 
one method to another which has made the Communal Problem a jig-saw 
puzzle. There being no principle there is no guide to tell why a particular 
method has failed. There being no principle there is no assurance that the 
new method will succeed.
The attempts at the solution of the Communal Problem are either in the 
nature of a coward’s plan to cow tow to the bully or of bully’s plan to dictate 
to the weak. Whenever a community grows powerful and demands certain 
political advantages, concessions are made to it to win its goodwill. There is 
no judicial examination of its claim ; no judgement on merits. The result is 
that there are no limits to demands and there are no limits to concessions. 
A start is made with a demand for separate electorate for a minority. It is 
granted. It is followed by a demand for a separate electorate for a community 
irrespective of the fact whether it is a minority or majority. That is granted. 
A demand is made for separate representation on a population basis. That 
is conceded. Next, a claim is made for weightage in representation. That 
is granted. It is followed by a demand for statutory majority over other 
minorities with the right for the majority to retain separate electorates. This 
is granted. This is followed by a demand that the majority rule of another 
community is intolerable, and therefore without prejudice to its rights to 
maintain majority rule over other minorities, the majority of the offending 
community should be reduced to equality. Nothing can be more absurd than 
this policy of eternal appeasement, it is a policy of limitless demand followed 
by endless appeasement.
Frankly, I don’t blame the community that indulges in this strategy. 
It indulges in it because it has found that it pays, it pursues it because 
there are no principles to fix the limits and it believes that more could be 
legitimately asked and would be easily given. On the other hand, there is a 
community economically poor, socially degraded, educationally backward and 
which is exploited, oppressed and tyrannized without shame and without 
remorse, disowned by society, unowned by Government and which has no 
security for protection and no guarantee for justice, fair play and equal 
opportunity. Such a community is told that it can have no safeguards, not
