217
 
RANADE, GANDHI AND JINNAH
removed the hope could not be realized. The new gospel was therefore 
followed by a call to duty. That duty was no other than the duty to reform 
Hindu society. Social reform became therefore the one dominant purpose of 
his life. He developed a passion for social reform and there was nothing he 
did not do to promote it. His methods included meetings, missions, lectures, 
sermons, articles, interviews, letters—all carried, on with an unrelenting 
zeal. He established many societies. He founded many journals. But he was 
not content with this. He wanted something more permanent, something 
more systematic for promoting the cause of social reform. So he founded the 
Social Conference, an All-India Organization which ran as an adjunct to the 
Indian National Congress. Year after year the Conference met to discuss 
the social ills and to find the ways of remedying them, and year after year 
Ranade attended its annual sessions as though it was a pilgrimage and 
fostered the cause of social reform.
In fostering the cause of social reform Ranade showed great courage. 
Many people of this generation will perhaps laugh at such a claim. Courting 
prison has become an act of martyrdom in India. It is regarded both as a 
patriotic act and also as an act of courage. Most people who would otherwise 
be beneath notice and in whose case it could rightly be said that they were 
scoundrels who had taken to politics as their last refuge, have by going to 
prison become martyrs and have acquired a name and fame which, to say 
the least, is quite astounding. There would be some substance in this view, 
if prison life involved the rigours to which men like Tilak and those of his 
generation had been subjected. Prison life today has lost all its terrors. It has 
become a mere matter of detention. Political prisoners are no longer treated 
as criminals. They are placed in a separate class. There are no hardships to 
suffer, there is no reputation to lose and there is no privation to undergo. 
It calls for no courage. But even when prison life had, as in the time of 
Mr. Tilak, its rigours the political prisoners could make no claim to greater 
courage than a social reformer. Most people do not realize that society can 
practise tyranny and oppression against an individual in a far greater degree 
than a Government can. The means and scope that are open to society for 
oppression are more extensive than those that are open to Government, also 
they are far more effective. What punishment in the penal code is comparable 
in its magnitude and its severity to excommunication ? Who has greater 
courage—the social reformer who challenges society and invites upon himself 
excommunication or the political prisoner who challenges Government and 
incurs sentence of a few months or a few years imprisonment ? There is 
also another difference which is often lost sight of inestimating the courage 
shown by the social reformer and the political patriot. When the social 
reformer challenges society there is nobody to hail him a martyr. There 
is nobody even to befriend him. He is loathed and shunned. But when
