222
 
DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES
who have none. The second ground that could be urged in support of the 
thesis is that they wanted political power because they wanted to confer on 
each individual certain fundamental rights by law and that such conferring of 
the political rights could not take place unless there was political power first 
obtained. This of course sounds very plausible. But is there any substance 
in it ? The idea of fundamental rights has become a familiar one since their 
enactment in the American Constitution and in the Constitution, framed by 
Revolutionary France. The idea of making a gift of fundamental rights to 
every individual is no doubt very laudable. The question is how to make 
them effective ? The prevalent view is that once rights are enacted in a 
law then they are safeguarded. This again is an unwarranted assumption. 
As experience proves, rights are protected not by law but by the social and 
moral conscience of society. If social conscience is such that it is prepared 
to recognize the rights which law chooses to enact, rights will be safe and 
secure. But if the fundamental rights are opposed by the community, no 
Law, no Parliament, no Judiciary can guarantee them in the real sense 
of the word. What is the use of the fundamental rights to the Negroes in 
America, to the Jews in Germany and to the Untouchables in India? As 
Burke said, there is no method found for punishing the multitude. Law can 
punish a single solitary recalcitrant criminal. It can never operate against 
a whole body of people who are determined to defy it. Social conscience—to 
use the language of Coleridge—that calm incorruptible legislator of the soul 
without whom all other powers would “meet in mere oppugnancy—is the 
only safeguard of all rights fundamental or non-fundamental.”
The third argument of the politicals could be based on the right to self-
Government. That self-Government is better than good Government is a 
well-known cry. One cannot give it more value than one can give to a slogan, 
and all would like to be assured that self-Government would also be a good 
Government. There is no doubt that the politicals wanted good Government 
and their aim was to establish a democratic form of Government. But they 
never stopped to consider whether a democratic form of Government was 
possible. Their contention was founded on a series of fallacies. A democratic 
form of Government presupposes a democratic form of society. The formal 
framework of democracy is of no value and would indeed be a misfit if there 
was no social democracy. The politicals never realized that democracy was 
not a form of Government : it was essentially a form of society. It may not 
be necessary for a democratic society to be marked by unity, by community 
of purpose, by loyalty to public ends and by mutuality of sympathy. But it 
does unmistakably involve two things. The first is an attitude of mind, an 
attitude of respect and equality towards their fellows. The second is a social 
organization free from rigid social barriers. Democracy is incompatible and 
inconsistent with isolation and exclusiveness, resulting in the distinction
