 
MAHARASHTRA AS A LINGUISTIC PROVINCE
103
democracy work better than it would in mixed Provinces. A Linguistic 
Province produces what democracy needs, namely, social homogeneity. 
Now the homogeneity of a people depends upon their having a belief in a 
common origin, in the possession of a common language and literature, in 
their pride in a common historic tradition, community of social customs, 
etc. is a proposition which no student of sociology can dispute. The 
absence of a social homogeneity in a State creates a dangerous situation 
especially where such a State is raised on a democratic structure. History 
shows that democracy cannot work in a State where the population is 
not homogeneous. In a heterogeneous population divided into groups 
which are hostile and anti-social towards one another the working of 
democracy is bound to give rise to cases of discrimination, neglect, 
partiality, suppression of the interests of one group at the hands of another 
group which happens to capture political power. The reason why in an 
heterogeneous society, democracy cannot succeed is because power instead 
of being used impartially and on merits and for the benefit of all is used 
for the aggrandisement of one group and to the detriment of another. 
On the other hand, a State which is homogeneous in its population can 
work for the true ends of democracy, for there are no artificial barriers 
or social antipathies which lead to the misuse of political power.
7. It follows that if democracy is to function properly the subjects of the 
State must be so distributed as to form a single homogeneous group. The 
constitution for the Provinces of India which is on the anvil is designed 
for a democratic form of Government. It follows that each Province must 
be homogeneous in its population if democracy in the Province is to be 
successful. This is simply another way of saying that each Province must 
be a linguistic unit if it is to be fitted to work a democratic constitution. 
Herein lies the justification for Linguistic Provinces.
Can the creation of Linguistic Provinces be postponed ?
8. Can the solution of this problem be postponed ? In this connection, 
I would like to place before the Commission the following considerations :
 (i) There is nothing new in the demand for Linguistic Provinces. 
Six Provinces (1) East Punjab, (2) United Provinces, (3) Bihar, 
(4) West Bengal, (5) Assam and (6) Orissa already exist as 
Linguistic Provinces. The Provinces which are clamouring for being 
reconstituted on linguistic basis are : (1) Bombay, (2) Madras and 
(3) Central Provinces. When the principle of Linguistic Provinces 
is accepted in the case of six Provinces, the other Provinces which 
are asking the same principle to be applied to them, cannot be 
asked to wait indefinitely:
 (ii) The situation in the Non-Linguistic Provinces has become 
exasperating if not dangerous and is in no way different from the
