305
 
FEDERATION VERSUS FREEDOM
Section 128 is addressed to the States. It runs as follows :
“128. (1) The executive authority of every Federated State shall be so 
exercised as not to impede or prejudice the exercise of the executive authority 
of the Federation so far as it is exercisable in the State by virtue of the law 
of the Federal Legislature which applies therein.
(2) If it appears to the Governor-General that the Ruler of any Federated 
State has in any way failed to fulfil his obligations under the preceding sub-
section, the Governor-General, acting in his discretion, may after considering 
any representations made to him by the Ruler, issue such directions to the 
Ruler as he thinks fit :
Provided that if any question arises under this section as to whether the 
executive authority of the Federation is exercisable in a State with respect 
to which it is so exercisable, the question may, at the instance either of the 
Federation or the Ruler, be referred to the Federal Court for determination by 
that Court in the exercise of its original jurisdiction under this Act.’
All these sections would have been very useful if there was any possibility 
of conflict in the exercise of their executive authority by these agencies. 
But these will be quite unnecessary because there would be as a matter 
of fact no conflict of executive authority which can arise only when such 
executive authority is followed by administrative act. When administration 
is divorced from Executive Authority there is no possibility of conflict and 
the admonitions contained in such sections are quite unnecessary.
Now it is possible that in the Federal Constitution the Federal Government 
may be altogether denuded of its powers of administration and may be made 
just as a frame without any spring of action in it. The constitution provides 
that the Governor-General of the Federal Legislature may provide that the 
administration of a certain law passed by it instead of being carried on by 
the Federal Executive might be entrusted to Units i.e. to the Provincial 
Governments and the Indian States. This is clear from the terms of section 
124 :
“124. (1) Notwithstanding anything in this Act, the Governor-General may, 
with the consent of the Government of a Province or the Ruler of a Federated 
State, entrust either conditionally to the Government or Ruler or to their 
respective Officers, functions in relation to any matter to which the executive 
authority of the Federation extends.
(2) An Act of the Federal Legislature may, notwithstanding that it relates 
to a matter with respect to which a Provincial Legislature has no power to 
make laws, confer powers and impose duties upon a Province or officers and 
authorities thereof.
(3) An Act of the Federal Legislature which extends to a Federated State 
may confer powers and impose duties upon the State or officers and authorities 
thereof to be designated for the purpose by the Ruler.
