114
 
DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES
is the source of their wealth ? No Gujarathi would claim that the Gujarathis 
are the natives of Bombay. If they are not the natives of Bombay, how 
did they come to Bombay ? Like the Portuguese, the French, the Dutch 
and the English on adventures to fight their way through and willing to 
take any risks? The answers which history gives to these questions are 
quite clear. The Gujarathis did not come to Bombay voluntarily. They 
were brought to Bombay by the officers of the East India Company to 
serve as commercial Adatias or go-betweens. They were brought because 
the East India Company’s officers who had their first factory in Surat 
had got used to Surti Banias as their go-betweens in carrying on their 
trade. This explains the entry of Gujarathis in Bombay. Secondly, the 
Gujarathis did not come to Bombay to trade on the basis of free and 
equal competition with other traders. They came as privileged persons 
with certain trading rights given to them exclusively by the East India 
Company. Their importation into Bombay was considered for the first 
time in the year 1671 by Governor Aungier. This fact is referred to in 
the Gazetteer of Bombay Town and Island, Vol. I in the following terms :10
“Another scheme for the advantage of Bombay in which Governor 
Aungier interested himself was the settlement of Surat Banias in 
Bombay. It appears that the Mahajan or committee of the Surat Bania 
community desired the assurance of certain privileges before risking the 
move to Bombay and that the company had given a general approval to 
the Mahajan’s proposal. On the 10th January the Surat Council wrote 
to the Company. The Mahajan or Chief Council of the Banias have been 
much satisfied with the answer which you were pleased to give to their 
petition sent you by the ship Samson touching their privileges in Bombay. 
It seems they have determined once more to trouble Your Honours with 
a letter which they have ordered your broker Bhimji Parakh to write, 
representing their desires that the said privileges may be confirmed to 
them under your great seal, for which their request they give you their 
reason and ground in their own letter which they have sent us to be 
transmitted to you and now goes in your packet by ship Falcon. The 
argument they use to strengthen their request seems to have some weight. 
They say the Honourable Company are perpetual and their ordinances 
always of force, but their Presidents and Councils are mutable, and the 
succeeding Presidents and Councils, do alter often what their predecessors 
have granted on which score they hope your Honours will be pleased to 
grant their petition. As to our judgments hereon, we humbly offer that we 
cannot see any detriment can accrue to you thereby, rather a considerable 
advantage may follow; and as to the latitude and extent of what privileges 
you shall afford them, it must be totally referred to your own wisdoms 
howsoever you shall please to determine in this matter. We judge
10. Bombay Gazetteer, I, pp. 46-47.
