325
 
FEDERATION VERSUS FREEDOM
of which the grant is composed.” Compare with this section 34 of the present 
Act of 1935 ; sub-section (1) of section 34 reads as follows:
“So much of the estimates of expenditure as relates to expenditure charged 
upon the revenues of the Federation shall not be submitted to the vote of the 
Legislature, but nothing in this sub-section shall be construed as preventing 
the discussion in either chamber of the Legislature of any of these estimates 
other than estimates relating to expenditure referred to in paragraph (a) or 
paragraph (f) of sub-section (3) of section 33.”
According to section 33 expenditure charged on the revenues of the 
Federation includes expenditure on the reserved subjects. On a comparison 
between the provisions of the two Acts, it is clear that under the old Act no 
distinctions were made by section 72D between Transferred and Reserved 
subjects, so far as the powers of the Legislature in regard to the granting 
of supply were concerned and the expenditure on Reserved subjects was not 
only open to discussion but was also subject to the vote of the Legislature. 
Under the provisions of section 34, of the new Act the Federal Legislature can 
only discuss the expenditure on the reserved subjects but cannot vote upon 
it. This is a very important distinction. Under the old constitution even the 
reserved subjects were amenable to the financial powers of the Legislature. 
Under the present constitution they arc independent of the financial powers 
of the Federal Legislature. It is true that in the provincial Constitution the 
vote of the Legislature with regard to expenditure on reserved subjects was 
not final. That under a proviso to section 72D the Governor was given the 
power “in relation to any such demand to act as if it had been assented 
to, notwithstanding the withholding of such assent or the reduction of the 
amount (by the Legislature) if the demand relates to reserved subject, and 
the Governor certifies that the expenditure provided for by the demand is 
essential to the discharge of his responsibility for the subject”. It is also true 
that in the Government of India Act, 1935 the amount of expenditure on 
reserved subjects is fixed to 42 crores. But the same difference exists, namely 
that under the old constitution the reserved subjects were amenable to the 
financial control of the Legislature while in the new constitution they are 
not. This difference is not a small difference. The power to grant supplies is 
the most effective mode of enforcing the responsibility of the executive. The 
power of certification might have deprived the Legislature of control of the 
reserved subjects. But it did not altogether destroy its influence. Under the 
present constitution the Legislature has not only no control over reserved 
subjects but also it cannot have any influence over them. There can therefore 
be no doubt that there was more responsibility in the dyarchy in the old 
Provincial Constitution than there is in this dyarchy in the Federation.
The fact that the Executive is not responsible to the Legislature is 
simply another way of stating that in the Federal Scheme the Executive
