 
THOUGHTS ON LINGUISTIC STATES
159
property. The State within which the property is situated is entitled to the 
yield of the Tax.
With regard to the Electricity Tax the situation is different.
When Gujarath and Maharashtra are separated—and they must be— 
Gujarath will claim the revenue derived from electricity produced and 
consumed within Gujarath. Maharashtra will claim the revenue derived from 
electricity produced and consumed within Maharashtra. Bombay City as a 
State will do the same. Can Bombay be allowed to do so and appropriate 
the revenue to itself ? Is it just ? Bombay City does not produce electricity. 
It is produced outside Bombay City in Maharashtra. Therefore the new 
Bombay City State has no right to appropriate to itself the whole revenue 
derived from electricity. The proper thing to do is to apply the principle of 
the segregation of the sources and division of the yield well known to all 
students of State Finance.
To put it in concrete shape let the Centre take over the taxation of 
Electricity and divide the yield among the four States of Maharashtra— 
(1) Bombay, (2) Western Maharashtra, (3) Central Maharashtra, (4) Eastern 
Maharashtra according to their needs.
It will also ease the financial strain that the three Maharashtras are 
likely to suffer on account of the separation of Bombay.
IV
UNITED OR DIVIDED ?
I have said that Bombay be given a new area and made into a separate 
City State.
There now remains the question of how to deal with the rest of the 
Maharashtra. I have suggested that the rest of the Maharashtra should be 
divided into three States.
From very ancient times Maharashtra has been divided into three States.
Maharashtra first comes to be known in history during the time of Ashok. 
It is mentioned in Mahavansa in connection with reference to the missionaries 
sent by Ashok to different parts of India for the purpose of propagating 
Buddhism. But thereafter the Pali literature speaks of Trai Maharashtrika 
or three Maharashtras. It means that from very ancient times there have 
been three Maharashtras. My proposal is not therefore new.
The distribution of population, area and revenue would be as shown in 
Table (on page 160).
The accompanying map No. 5 will show the area and boundaries of each 
of the three divisions.
