110
 
DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES
made to create larger provincial units. Smaller provincial units will be a 
perpetual burden in normal times and a source of weakness in an emergency. 
Such a situation must be avoided. That is why I insist that all parts of 
Maharashtra should be merged together in a single province.
PART IV
MAHARASHTRA AND THE CITY OF BOMBAY
Controversy over Bombay
21. Should the City of Bombay be included in Maharashtra or not is 
another point over which there has been a controversy. A meeting was held in 
Bombay in the building of the Indian Merchants Chamber. The meeting was 
attended by no more than sixty. With the exception of one Indian-Christian 
it was attended by only Gujarathi-speaking merchants and industrialists. 
Although it was small and sectional meeting, its proceedings were flashed 
on the front page of every important newspaper in India and the Times of 
India was so impressed by its importance that it wrote an editorial which 
while mildly castigating the vituperative tone which the speakers at the 
meeting adopted against the Maharashtrians, supported the resolutions 
passed at the meeting regarding the future of Bombay. This proves what 
truth there is in the reply given by Lord Birkenhead to the Irish Leader, 
Mr. Redmond, in the course of the Irish controversy when he said that there 
are cases where a minority is a majority.
My memorandum would be woefully incomplete if I omitted to deal with 
the pros and cons of this controversy. This is because of two reasons : In 
the first place, the meeting has been recognized to be very important and 
secondly because the resolutions of the meeting have been supported by 
eminent University Professors.
Proposals regarding Bombay
22. The meeting passed the following resolutions :
 (1) That the question of the creation of Linguistic Provinces should be 
postponed ; or
 (2) That if it is not postponed, Bombay City should be constituted into 
a separate Province.
There is a third suggestion, namely, that Konkan should be constituted 
into a separate Province with Bombay as its capital. There is hardly any 
support to this plan. There is therefore no necessity to discuss it.
Decision regarding Bombay must be made now
23. I have no complaint against that part of the Resolution which 
says the question of Linguistic Provinces be postponed provided the main 
question namely whether Bombay should or should not be included in 
Maharashtra is settled. If this question was settled it did not matter if it
