219
 
RANADE, GANDHI AND JINNAH
them, and to nothing more. They have no life of their own to live, and 
no right to develop their own personality. This has been the gospel of the 
Hindu Religion. Hindu philosophy, whether it is Vedanta, Sankhya, Nyaya, 
Vaishashika, has moved in its own circle without in anyway affecting the 
Hindu religion. It has never had the courage to challenge this gospel. That 
Hindu philosophy that everything is Brahma remained only a matter of 
intellect. It never became a social philosophy. The Hindu philosophers had 
both their philosophy and their Manu held apart in two hands, the right not 
knowing what the left had. The Hindu is never troubled by their inconsistency. 
As to their social system, can things be worst ? The Caste system is in itself 
a degenerate form of the Chaturvarnya which is the ideal of the Hindu. How 
can anybody who is not a congenital idiot accept Chaturvarnya as the ideal 
form of society ? Individually and socially it is a folly and a crime. One class 
and one class alone to be entitled to education and learning! One class and 
one class alone to be entitled to arms! One class and one class alone to trade! 
One class and one class alone to serve! For the individual the consequences are 
obvious. Where can you find a learned man who has no means of livelihood 
who will not degrade his education? Where can you find a soldier with no 
education and culture who will use his arms to conserve and not to destroy ? 
Where can you find a merchant with nothing but the acquisitive instinct to 
follow who will not descend to the level of the brute ? Where can you find the 
servant who is not to acquire education, who is not to own arms and who is 
not to possess other means of livelihood to be a man as his maker intended 
him to be ? If baneful to the individual it makes society vulnerable. It is not 
enough for a social structure to be good for a fair weather. It must be able 
to weather the storm. Can the Hindu caste system stand the gale and the 
wind of an aggression ? It is obvious that it cannot. Either for defence or 
for offence a society must be able to mobilize its forces. With functions and 
duties exclusively distributed and immutably assigned, what way is there 
for mobilization ? Ninety per cent of the Hindus— Brahmins, Vaishyas and 
Shudras—could not bear arms under the Hindu social system. How can a 
country be defended if its army cannot be increased in the hour of its peril. 
It is not Buddha who, as is often alleged, weakened Hindu society by his 
gospel of non-violence. It is the Brahminic theory of Chaturvarnya that has 
been responsible not only for the defeat but for the decay of Hindu society. 
Some of you will take offence at what I have said about the demoralizing 
effect of the Hindu socio-religious ideal on Hindu society. But what is the 
truth ? Can the charge be denied ? Is there any society in the world which 
has unapproachables, unshadowables and unseeables ? Is there any society 
which has got a population of Criminal Tribes ? Is there a society in which 
there exists today primitive people, who live in jungles, who do not know 
even to clothe themselves ? How many do they count in numbers ? Is it a 
matter of hundreds, is it a matter of thousands ? I wish they numbered
