COMMUNAL DEADLOCK AND A WAY TO SOLVE IT
375
IX
MATTERS NOT COVERED
(i) QUESTION OF SPECIAL SAFEGUARDS
There are other demands made on behalf of particular minorities such as :
 (1) Provision of a Statutory Officer to report on the condition of minorities.
 (2) Statutory provision of State aid for education, and
 (3) Statutory provision for land settlement. But they are not of a communal 
character, I do not therefore wish to enlarge upon them here.
(ii) ABORIGINAL TRIBES
It will be obvious that my proposals do not cover the Aboriginal Tribes 
although they are larger in number than the Sikhs, Anglo Indians, Indian 
Christians and Parsees. I may state the reasons why I have omitted them 
from my scheme. The Aboriginal Tribes have not as yet developed any political 
sense to make the best use of their political opportunities and they may easily 
become mere instruments in the hands either of a majority or a minority and 
thereby disturb the balance without doing any good to themselves. In the 
present stage of their development it seems to me that the proper thing to 
do for these backward communities is to establish a Statutory Commission to 
administer what are now called the ‘excluded areas’ on the same basis as was 
done in the case of the South African Constitution. Every Province in which 
these excluded areas are situated should be compelled to make an annual 
contribution of a prescribed amount for the administration of these areas. 
(iii) INDIAN STATES
It will also be noticed that my proposals do not include the Indian States. 
I am not opposed to the inclusion of the Indian States, provided the terms 
and conditions of inclusion are such—
 (1) that the dichotomy of divided sovereignty between British India and 
Indian States is completely done away with,
 (2) that the judicial and political boundaries which separate British India 
from Indian States will disappear, that there will be no such entities 
as British India or Indian States and in their place there will be only 
one entity namely India, and
 (3) that the terms and conditions of inclusion do not prevent India from 
having full and plenary powers of a Dominion. I have worked out a 
scheme for the fusion of the Indian States and British India, which 
will permit the realization of these objects. I do not wish to overburden 
this address with the details of the plan. For the moment, it is better 
if British India marches to her goal without complicating its progress 
by an entanglement with the Indian States.
