326
 
DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES
is supreme. This supremacy of the Executive may be maintained in various 
ways. It may be maintained by curtailing the powers of the Legislature or it 
may be maintained by planning the composition of the Legislature in such a 
way that the Legislature will always be at the beck and call of the Executive.
The Federal Scheme adopts both these means. In the first place, it limits 
the powers of the Federal Legislature. I have already described how greatly 
the Federal Scheme curtails the financial powers of the Federal Legislature. 
The Federal Legislature has no right to refuse supplies to any expenditure 
which is declared to be a charge on the revenues.
The Federal Scheme also curtails the Legislative powers of the Federal 
Legislature. These restraints are specified in section 108 which reads as 
follows :
“108. (1) Unless the Governor-General in his discretion thinks fit to give 
his previous sanction, there shall not be introduced into, or moved in, either 
Chamber of the Federal Legislature, any Bill or amendment which—
 (a) repeals, amends or is repugnant to any provisions of any Act of 
Parliament extending to British India ; or
 (b) repeals, amends or is repugnant to any Governor-General’s or 
Governor’s Act, or any ordinance promulgated in his discretion by 
the Governor-General or a Governor; or
 (c) affects matters as respects which the Governor-General is, by or 
under this Act, required to act in his discretion; or
 (d) repeals, amends or affects any Act relating to any police force ; or
 (e) affects the procedure for criminal proceedings in which European 
British subjects are concerned ; or
 (f) subjects-persons not resident in British India to greater taxation 
than persons resident in British India or subjects companies not 
wholly controlled and managed in British India to greater taxation 
than companies wholly controlled and managed therein ; or
 (g) affects the grant of relief from any Federal tax on income in respect 
of income taxed or taxable in the United Kingdom.
(2) Unless the Governor-General in his discretion thinks fit to give his 
previous sanction, there shall not be introduced into, or moved in a Chamber 
of a Provincial Legislature any Bill or amendment which—
 (a) repeals, amends or is repugnant to any provisions of any Act of 
Parliament extending to British India ; or
 (b) repeals, amends or is repugnant to any Governor-General’s Act, or 
any ordinance promulgated in his discretion by the Governor-General; 
or
 (c) affects matters as respects which the Governor-General is by or 
under this Act, required to act in his discretion ; or
