124
 
DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES
subjection. The problem therefore is not a problem peculiar to Maharashtra. 
It is a general problem.
54. What is the remedy for this problem ? Prof. Gheewala believes that 
the remedy lies in having a mixed State. So far as this remedy is concerned 
it is not his own. He has adopted it from Lord Acton. But I have no doubt 
that so far as Lord Acton advocates this remedy he is quite wrong. Lord 
Acton cites the case of Austria in support of his view. Unfortunately, Lord 
Acton did not live to see the fate of Austria. It was a mixed State. But far 
from providing for the safety of nationalities the clash of nationalities blew 
up Austria to bits. The real remedy is not a mixed State but an absolute 
State with no power to the people which is generally captured by a communal 
majority and exercised in the name of the people. Is Prof. Gheewala prepared 
for this remedy ? One need have no doubt to what his answer would be.
55. In the second place, Prof. Gheewala has confounded nationality in the 
social sense of the term with Nationality in its legal and political sense. 
People often speak of nationality in speaking about Linguistic Provinces. 
Such use of the term can be only in the non-legal and non-political sense 
of the term. In my scheme there is no room even for the growth of separate 
provincial nationality. My proposal nips it in the bud. But even if the 
commonly suggested pattern of Linguistic Provinces with the language of 
the Province as the official language were adopted, Provinces cannot have 
that attribute of sovereignty which independent nations have.
56. It is very difficult to understand what exactly what Prof. Gheewala 
wants. Broadly he wants two things : He wants a mixed State and he also 
wants that a dominant section should not be in a position to reduce the 
smaller sections to subjection. I cannot see how Linguistic Provinces can come 
in the way of achieving it. For even after Provinces have been re-constituted 
on linguistic basis,—
 (1) Provinces will continue to be a conglomeration of communities which 
will give Prof. Gheewala the mixed State that he wants ;
 (2) If Prof. Gheewala wants a more pronounced form of a mixed State to 
protect smaller communities or nationalities, he will certainly have 
it at the Centre.
As I have said, I do not think a mixed State is either a good State or stable 
State. But if Prof. Gheewala prefers it, he will have it in one form or another, 
both in the Provinces as well as at the Centre, in the former in the form of 
different communities and in the latter in the form of the representatives 
of different Provinces.
57. With regard to his second objective, there will be double protection. 
In the first place, the citizen will have such protection as a mixed State 
he thinks can give. Secondly, citizenship will be common throughout India.
