251
 
EVIDENCE BEFORE THE SOUTHBOROUGH COMMITTEE
affairs of men, the secular interests of a group can be well represented by 
a candidate from another group.
8. From this point of view a territorial constituency will be sufficient 
for a popular Government. A little more consideration will show that it 
will be sufficient for only one-half the definition of popular Government. 
How true it is, will be shown presently. In an electoral fight between the 
various groups in a territorial constituency the voters will discriminate in 
favour of a candidate with whom they are in sympathy. But with whom 
they will be in sympathy is determined for them in advance. Given two 
candidates belonging to different groups but purporting to represent the 
same interest, the voters will mark their votes on the person belonging to 
the same community. Any group yielding a large number of electors will 
have its own candidate elected. This discrimination on the part of the voters, 
though it may not leave unrepresented the interests of the members of the 
minor groups, leaves them without any chance of personal representation.
9. To those who are busy in devising schemes for the proper and adequate 
representation of interests and opinions dilating on the importance of 
personal representation is likely to seem idle. But personal representation 
is not therefore unimportant. In recent times “Government for the people” 
has claimed more attention than “Government by the people”. In fact there 
are instances to show that “Government for the people” can exist in the best 
sense of the phrase without there being a “Government by the people.” Yet 
all political theorists will unanimously condemn such a form of Government. 
And the why of it is important to know. It will be granted that each kind 
of association, as it is an educative environment, exercises a formative 
influence on the active dispositions of its members. Consequently, what one 
is as a person is what one is as associated with others. A Government for 
the people, but not by the people, is sure to educate some into masters and 
others into subjects; because it is by the reflex effects of association that one 
can feel and measure the growth of personality. The growth of personality 
is the highest aim of society. Social arrangement must secure free initiative 
and opportunity to every individual to assume any role he is capable of 
assuming provided it is socially desirable. A new rule is a renewal and 
growth of personality. But when an association—and a Government is after 
all an association—is such that in it every role cannot be assumed by all, it 
tends to develop the personality of the few at the cost of the many—a result 
scrupulously to be avoided in the interest of Democracy. To be specific, it is 
not enough to be electors only. It is necessary to be law-makers ; otherwise 
who can be law-makers will be masters of those who can only be electors.
10. Territorial constituencies are therefore objected to, and rightly, on 
the ground that they do nothing to prevent this absurd outcome. They 
erroneously suppose that electors will vote on the programmes of the
