335
 
FEDERATION VERSUS FREEDOM
Indian politicians have expressed their sense of sorrow and resentment 
over the fact that the Indian Legislatures have not been given by the Act 
any constituent powers.
Under the Government of India Act neither the Federal Legislature, nor 
the Provincial Legislature have any powers of altering or amending the 
constitution. The only thing, which the Act by virtue of section 308 does. is to 
permit the Federal Legislature and Provincial Legislature to pass a resolution 
recommending any change in the constitution, and make it obligatory upon 
the Secretary of State to place it before both Houses of Parliament. This 
is contrary to the provisions contained in the Constitutions of the United 
States, Australia, the German Federation and Switzerland. There is no reason 
why constituent power should not have been given within certain defined 
limits to the Legislatures in India when they were fully representative of 
all sections and of all interests. Be that as it may, the fact remains that the 
Indian Legislatures cannot make any changes in constitution, not even in 
the franchise, much less in making the reserved subjects transferred. The 
only authority which can change the Constitution is of course the British 
Parliament. But very few seem to be aware of the fact that even Parliament 
has no powers to alter the Federal Constitution. This, however, is the truth 
and the sooner we all realize it the better.
From this point of view the importance of Schedule II cannot be 
overestimated. I am sorry, it has not received the attention which it 
deserves. Schedule II is not only a charter but is also a chart along which 
the Constitution can move. The whole Schedule is worth careful study. 
What does Schedule II say ? Schedule II says that certain provisions of the 
Government of India Act may be amended by Parliament and that certain 
other provisions of the Act shall not be amended by Parliament. That is 
simply another way of saying that Parliament is not supreme and that its 
right to alter the Constitution is limited.
What would happen if Parliament did amend those provisions of the Act 
which Schedule II says shall not be amended by Parliament ? The answer, 
which Schedule II gives, is that such an Act will have the effect of ‘affecting’ 
the accession of the States to the Federation, which means it will have the 
effect of destroying the binding character of the Instrument of Accession. In 
other words, if Parliament amended any of the provisions of the Act, which 
Schedule II says shall not be amended, the Princes would get the right to 
secede from the Federation. I am aware that some eminent lawyers have 
taken a different view. They hold that the Princes, once they come into the 
Federation, cannot go out of it. I have mentioned my view for what it is 
worth and I will say that my view is not altogether baseless.
At any rate the Solicitor-General and Secretary of State gave the 
same interpretation, as I am giving, in the House of Commons, when the 
Government of India Bill was being discussed.
