424
 
DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES
8. The reason why the arguments advanced by the opponents of separate 
electorates do not stand the scrutiny of logic and experience is due entirely 
to the fact that their approach to the subject is fundamentally wrong. It is 
wrong in two respects :
 (i) They fail to realize that the system of electorates has nothing to 
do with the religious nexus or communal nexus. It is nothing but a 
mechanism to enable a minority to return its true representative to 
the Legislature. Being a mechanism for the protection of a minority 
it follows that whether the electorate should be joint or separate 
must be left to be determined by the minority.
 (ii) They fail to make any distinction between the demand for separate 
electorates by a majority community and a similar demand made 
by a minority community. A majority community has no right to 
demand separate electorates. The reason is simple. A right by a 
majority community to demand separate electorates is tantamount 
to a right to establish the Government of the majority community 
over the minority community without the consent of the minority. 
This is contrary to the well-established doctrine of democracy that 
government must be with the consent of the governed. No such 
evil consequence follows from the opposite principle namely that 
a minority community is entitled to determine the nature of the 
electorates suited to its interests, because there is no possibility of 
the minority being placed in a position to govern the majority.
9. A correct attitude towards the whole question rests on the following
axioms :
 (i) The system of electorates being a devise for the protection of the 
minority, the issue whether the electoral system should be the joint 
electorate or separate electorate must be left to the wishes of the 
minority. If it is large enough to influence the majority it will choose 
joint electorates. If it is too small for the purpose, it will prefer 
separate electorates for fear of being submerged.
 (ii) The majority, being in a position to rule can have no voice in the 
determination of the system of electorates. If the minority wants joint 
electorates, the majority must submit itself to joint electorates. If the 
minority decides to have separate electorates for itself the majority 
cannot refuse to grant them. In other words, the majority must look 
to the decision of the minority and abide by it.
PART I—CLAUSE 2
This demand may appear to be outside the Poona Pact in as much as 
the Poona Pact made no provision for it. This would not be correct. As 
a matter of fact, if no provision was made, it was because there was no 
need to make such a provision. This was due to two reasons : Firstly, it
