294
 
DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES
There is no simpler way of explaining it than by contrasting it with the 
Unitary Form of Government.
Although the Federal Form of Government is distinct from the Unitary 
form, it is not easy to see distinction. On the other hand, there is, outwardly 
at any rate, a great deal of similarity between the two. The Government 
of almost every country in these days is carried on by an inter-related 
group of Administrative Units operating in specific areas and discharging 
specific public functions. This is true of a country with a Federal Form of 
Government and also of a country with a Unitary form of Government. In 
a Federal Constitution there is a Central Government and there are inter-
related to it several Local Governments. In the same way in an Unitary 
Constitution there is a Central Government and there are inter-related to 
it several Local Governments. On the surface, therefore, there appears to 
be no difference between the two.
There is, however, a real difference between them although it is not 
obvious. That difference lies in the nature of the inter-relationship between 
the Central and the Local Administrative Units. This difference may be 
summed up in this way. In the Unitary Form of Government, the powers of 
the local bodies are derived from an Act of the Central Government. That 
being so the powers of the Local Government can always be withdrawn by 
the Central Government. In the Federal form of Government the powers of 
the Central Government as well as of the Local Government are derived 
by the law of the Constitution which neither the Local Government nor 
the Central Government can alter by its own Act. Both derive their powers 
from the law of the Constitution and each is required by the Constitution to 
confine itself to the powers given to it. Not only does the Constitution fix the 
powers of each but the constitution establishes a judiciary to declare any Act 
whether of the Local or the Central Government as void if it transgresses 
the limits fixed for it by the Constitution. This is well stated by Clement in 
his volume on the Canadian Constitution in the following passage :
“Apart from detail, the term federal union in these modern times implies 
an agreement .................... to commit .................... people to the control of one 
common government in relation to such matters as are agreed upon as of common 
concern, leaving each local government still independent and autonomous in 
all other matters, as a necessary corollary the whole-arrangement constitutes 
a fundamental law to be recognised in and enforced through the agency of the 
Courts.
“The exact position of the line which is to divide matters of common 
concern to the whole federation from matters of local concern in each 
unit is not of the essence of federalism. Where it is to be drawn in 
any proposed scheme depends upon the view adopted by the federating 
communities as to what, in their actual circumstances, geographical, com-
