MR. RUSSELL AND THE RECONSTRUCTION OF SOCIETY
491
food-material, intellectual or spiritual it craves for is a matter beyond its 
control. If it is mutilated by the lack of variety of food, it will be through 
social default and not its own.
Another allegations of Mr. Russell is that property as the embodient of 
the possessive instinct leads to war. One may agree with Mr. Russell and 
yet say that Fredric Nietzsche understood the effects of property better than 
Mr. Russell. This effect is well summed up in a story which Thucydides 
relates somewhere. He depicts a farmer who having gathered his harvest 
was sitting by the side of the heap brooding over the market and the gains 
of his business; while deeply engrossed in his reverie he was surprised by a 
robber. Thus aroused, the farmer, without even uttering a word of protest, 
at once consented to share his pile and thanked heavens for having escaped 
with the loss only of a half. Whether the above is a fact or a fable, it contains 
a kernel of truth not always perceived. How much man is tamed of his wild 
nature by his acquisitions through the course of time it is not possible to 
measure. But that it is so is beyond doubt. Nietzsche was perfectly aware 
of this and would not therefore let his Superman hold any property lest he 
(the Superman) might not play the havoc Nietzsche wanted him to play for 
the fear of losing his acquisitions in the bargain. The trouble therefore one 
might say, is not with property but with the unequal distribution of it; for 
those who have none of it are prone to perpetrate more destruction for its 
possession than, those who have. An industrial dispute of the modern time 
is another illustration and that workers, in a strike, use more violence than 
their employers can only be understood in the light of the above remarks. 
It is the existence of the stake that blunts the sword and it is the non-
existence thereof that sharpens it. Thus property may be aggressive. Yet it 
is not without its compensating effects.
It would be unjust to pass over silently a most fundamental notion that 
pervades the whole outlook of Mr. Russell. He says that “men’s impulses 
and desires may be divided into those that are creative and those that are 
possessive. Some of our activities are directed to creating what would not 
otherwise exist, others towards acquiring or retaining what exists already. 
The best life is that in which creative impulses play the largest part and 
possessive impulses the smallest.14 Is it possible so to divide the impulses ? 
Is there such a thing as an impulse to appropriate? It is beyond the scope 
of this review to discuss this large question. I simply intend to raise a query 
because I feel, that by making the distinction as one of instinct, Mr. Russell 
is not quite on safe ground. Every impulse if uninhibited, will lead to some 
creative act. Whether the product will be appropriated or not is a matter 
wholly different from any act of impulse or instinct. It depends, I submit, 
upon the method of its production—whether individualistic or otherwise—and 
upon the nature of its use—whether communal or otherwise. No one sets
14. Principles of Social Reconstruction, p. 234.
