299
 
FEDERATION VERSUS FREEDOM
Being in the Concurrent list, the Federal Legislature has power to 
legislate upon with respect to these. Can the Federal Legislature also while 
legislating upon them raise revenue from them ? The Act does not seem to 
furnish any answer to this question. It may however be suggested that the 
rules contained in section 104 regarding the exercise of Residuary Powers 
will also apply here.
The sources of revenue which are made divisible by the Constitution are : 
(1) Income Tax other than Corporation Tax and (2) Jute Export duty. Those 
which are made divisible according to the Federal Law are : (1) Duty on 
Salt, (2) Excise duty on Tobacco and other goods and (3) Duties of Export.
In respect of the financial powers of the Federation there is one feature 
which by reason of its pecularity is deserving of attention. The Act in giving 
the Federal Government the right to tax, makes a distinction between power 
to levy the tax and the right to collect it and even where it gives the power 
to levy the tax it does not give it the right to collect it. This is so in the 
case of surcharge on Income tax and the Corporation tax. The Income tax 
is only leviable in the Provinces and not in the States although it is a tax 
for Federal purposes. The State subjects are liable to pay only a Federal 
surcharge on Income Tax because such a surcharge is leviable both within 
the Provinces as well as the States. But under section 138(3) the Federal 
Government has no right to collect it within the States. The collection is 
left to the Ruler of the State. The Ruler, instead of collecting the surcharge 
from his subjects, may agree to pay the Federation a lump sum and the 
Federation is bound to accept the same. Similar is the case with regard to 
the Corporation tax. The Federation can levy it on State subjects but cannot 
collect it directly by its own agency. Section 139 provides that the collection 
of the Corporation tax shall as of right be the function of the Ruler.
V
CHARACTER OF THE FEDERATION
(1) The Nature of the Union
How does the Indian Federation compare with other Federations ? This is 
not only a natural inquiry but it is also a necessary inquiry. The method of 
comparison and contrast is the best way to understand the nature of a thing. 
This comparison can be instituted from points of view. There is no time for 
a comparison on so vast a scale. I must confine this comparison to some 
very moderate dimensions. Therefore I propose to raise only four questions : 
(1) Is this Federation a perpetual Union ? (2) What is the relationship of 
the Units to the Federal Government ? (3) What is the relationship of the 
Units as between themselves ? (4) What is the relationship of the people 
under the Units ?
There is no doubt that the accession of the Indian States to the Federation 
is to be perpetual so long as the Federation created by the Act is in
