378
 
DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES
have. My proposals do not ask the Hindus to accept the principle of unanimity. 
My proposals do not ask the Hindus to abandon the principle of majority 
rule. All I am asking them is to be satisfied with a relative majority. Is it 
too much for them to concede this ?
Without marking any such sacrifice the Hindu majority is not justified in 
representing to the outside world that the minorities are holding up India’s 
Freedom. This false propaganda will not pay. For the minorities are doing 
nothing of the kind. They are prepared to accept freedom and the dangers 
in which they likely to be involved; provided they granted satisfactory 
safeguards. This gesture of the minorities is not to be treated as a matter 
for which Hindus need not be grateful. It may well be contrasted with what 
happened in Ireland. Mr. Redmond, the leader of the Irish Nationalists once 
told Carson, the leader of Ulster; “Consent to United Ireland, Ask for any 
safeguard and they shall be granted to you”. He is reported to have turned 
round and said : “Damn your safeguards ; we don’t want to be ruled by you”. 
The minorities in India have not said that. They are ready to be satisfied 
with safeguards. I ask the Hindus Is this not worth a mass ? I am sure it is.
XII 
CONCLUSION
These are some of the proposals I have had in mind for the solution of 
the Communal Problem. They do not commit the All-India Scheduled Castes 
Federation. They do not even commit me. In putting them forth, I am 
doing nothing more than exploring a new way. My emphasis is more on the 
principle, I have enunciated, than on the actual proposals. If the principles 
are accepted then I am sure the solution of the Communal Question will 
not be as baffling as it has been in the past.
The problem of solving the Indian deadlock is not easy. I remember reading 
a historian describing the condition of Germany before the Confederation 
of 1867 as one of ‘ Divinely Ordained Confusion’. Whether that was true of 
Germany or not, it seems to me that they form a very accurate description 
of the present conditions of India. Germany did get out of this confusion, 
if not at one stroke at least by successive stages until just before the war 
she became a unified people, unified in mind, unified in outlook and unified 
by belief in a common destiny. India has not so far succeeded in evolving 
order out of her confusion. It is not that she had no opportunities to do 
so. In fact, there have been quite a number. The first opportunity came in 
1927, when Lord Birkenhead gave a challenge to Indians asking them to 
produce a constitution for India. That challenge was taken up. A committee 
was formed to frame a constitution. A constitution was produced and was 
known as ‘The Nehru Constitution’. It was, however, not accepted by Indians 
and was buried without remorse. A second opportunity presented itself to 
Indians in 1930, when they assembled at the Round Table Conference. 
There again, Indians failed to play their part and write out their own
