304
 
DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES
has power to make laws for that State except in so far as the executive authority 
of the Federation becomes exercisable in the State to the exclusion of the 
executive authority of the Ruler by virtue of a federal law.”.
In plain language what the sub-section means is this—With regard to a 
province the executive authority of the Federation extends to all matters 
over which the Federation has legislative authority. With regard to the 
State the position is different. The mere fact that the federal legislature has 
authority to legislate in respect of a subject does not give the Federation any 
executive authority over the State in respect of that subject. Such executive 
authority can be conferred only as a result of a law passed by the Federation. 
Whether it is possible to pass such a law is problematic in view of the large 
representation which the States have in Federal Legislature. Whatever may 
be the eventuality, in theory the executive authority of the Federation does 
not extend to a Federated State. The position is that while with regard to 
the provinces the Federation can legislate as well as execute, in the case of 
the Federated States, the Federation can legislate, but cannot execute. The 
execution may be with the State.
(c) In the matter of administration
When you begin to examine the constitution from the point of view of 
administration you will find certain sections in the Act which lay down rules 
for the guidance of the Federal Government, of the Provincial Governments 
and of the State Governments. The purpose of the sections is to tell them how 
they should exercise the executive authority belonging to them respectively. 
These sections are 122, 126 and 128.
Section 122 is addressed to the Federal Government. It reads as follows :
“122. (1) The executive authority of every Province and Federated State shall 
be so exercised as to secure respect for the laws of the Federal Legislature 
which apply in that Province or State.
(2) The reference in sub-section (1) of this section to laws of the Federal 
Legislature shall, in relation to any Province, include a reference to any existing 
Indian Law applying in that Province.
(3) Without prejudice to any of the other provisions of this part of this Act, 
in the exercise of the executive authority of the Federation in any Province or 
Federated State regard shall be had to the interests of that Province or State.”.
Section 126 is addressed to the Provincial Governments. It provides that— 
“126 (1) The executive (authority of every Province shall be so exercised 
as not to impede or prejudice the exercise of the executive authority of the 
Federation, and the executive authority of the Federation shall extend to the 
giving of such directions to a Province as may appear to the Federal Government 
to be necessary for that purpose.”.
