STATES AND MINORITIES
409
plan is that it does not leave the establishment of State Socialism to the 
will of the Legislature. It establishes State Socialism by the Law of the 
Constitution and thus makes it unalterable by any act of the Legislature 
and the Executive.
Students of Constitutional Law will at once raise a protest. They are 
sure to ask : Does not the proposal go beyond the scope of the usual type 
of Fundamental Rights ? My answer is that it does not. If it appears to go 
beyond it is only because the conception of Fundamental Rights on which 
such criticism is based is a narrow conception. One may go further and say 
that even from the narrow conception of the scope of the Constitutional 
Law as comprising no more than Fundamental Rights the proposal can find 
ample justification. For what is the purpose of prescribing by law the shape 
and form of the economic structure of society ? The purpose is to protect 
the liberty of the individual from invasion by other individuals which is the 
object of enacting Fundamental Rights. The connection between individual 
liberty and the shape and form of the economic structure of society may not 
be apparent to everyone. None the less the connection between the two is 
real. It will be apparent if the following considerations are borne in mind.
Political Democracy rests on four premises which may be set out in the 
following terms :
 (i) The individual is an end in himself.
 (ii) That the individual has certain inalienable rights which must be 
guaranteed to him by the Constitution.
 (iii) That the individual shall not be required to relinquish any of his 
constitutional rights as a condition precedent to the receipt of a 
privilege.
 (iv) That the State shall not delegate powers to private persons to govern 
others.
Anyone who studies the working of the system of social economy based 
on private enterprise and pursuit of personal gain will realize how it 
undermines, if it does not actually violate, the last two premises on which 
Democracy rests. How many have to relinquish their constitutional rights 
in order to gain their living ? How many have to subject themselves to be 
governed by private employers?
Ask those who are unemployed whether what are called Fundamental 
Rights are of any value to them. If a person who is unemployed is offered 
a choice between a job of some sort, with some sort of wages, with no fixed 
hours of labour and with an interdict on joining a union and the exercise 
of his right to freedom of speech, association, religion, etc., can there be 
any doubt as to what his choice will be. How can it be otherwise ? The 
fear of starvation, the fear of losing a house, the fear of losing savings if 
any, the fear of being compelled to take children away from school, the fear
