350
 
DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES
a minority. They hit upon this system because they felt such as a system 
of balance of Provinces would permit the Muslims in the Muslim majority 
Provinces to hold the Hindu minorities in their Provinces as hostage for 
the good behaviour of the Hindu Majorities in the Provinces in which the 
Muslims were in minority. The creation of Muslim majority Provinces and to 
make them strong and powerful was their dominant interest. To accomplish 
this they demanded the separation of Sindh and the grant of responsible 
government to the North West Frontier Provinces so that the Muslims could 
have a command of four Provinces. To make the Provinces strong they 
insisted on making the Centre weak. As a means to this end the Muslims 
demanded that residuary powers should be given to the Provinces and the 
Hindu representation in the Centre should be reduced by giving the Muslims 
not only 1/3 of seats from the total fixed for British India but also 1/3 from 
the total assigned to the Princes.
The Hindus as represented by the Hindu Mahasabha were concerned 
with only one thing. How to meet what they called the menace of the 
Musalmans ? The Hindu Mahasabha felt that the accession of the Princes 
was an accretion to the Hindu strength. Everything else was to them of no 
consequence. Its point of view was Federation at any cost.
The next class whose point of view is worthy of consideration is the Indian 
Commercial Community. The commercial community is no doubt a small 
community in a vast country like India, but there can be no doubt about it 
that the point of view of this community is really more decisive than the 
point of view of any other community. This community has been behind 
the Congress. It is this community which has supplied the Congress the 
sinews of war and it knows that having paid the piper it can call for the 
tune. The commercial community is primarily interested in what is called 
commercial discrimination and the lowering of the exchange Ratio. It was a 
very narrow and limited point of view. The Indian Commercial Community 
is out to displace Europeans from Trade and Commerce and take their place. 
This it claims to do in the name of nationalism. It wants the right to lower 
the exchange rate and make profit in its foreign trade. This also it claims 
to do in the name of nationalism. Beyond getting profits to themselves the 
Merchants and Traders have no other consideration.
What shall I say about the Congress? What was its point of view? I 
am sure I am not exaggerating or misrepresenting facts when I say that 
the Congress point of view at the Round Table Conference was that the 
Congress was the only party in India and that no body else counted and 
that the British should settle with the Congress only. This was the burden 
of Mr. Gandhi’s song at the Round Table Conference, He was so busy in 
establishing his own claim to recognition by the British as the dictator of 
India that he forgot altogether that the important question was not, with
