240
 
DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES
as much as a plant needs watering. Both will otherwise wither and die. 
Ranade agreed with Mazzini and did not believe that the fructification of 
an idea needed the resources of strenuous husbandry. If the Liberal Party 
is content with mere formulation of principles and policies it is also because 
of this tradition of Ranade.
What is the duty of the Liberals. All Liberals I know will say our duty 
is to follow the master. What else could be the attitude of a devout band of 
disciples ? But can anything be more mistaken or more uncritical ? Such an 
attitude implies two things. It means that a great man works by imposing 
his maxims on his disciples. It means that the disciples should not be wiser 
than the master. Both these conclusions are wrong. They do injustice to 
the master. No great man really does his work by crippling his disciple by 
forcing on them his maxims or his conclusions. What a great man does is 
not to impose his maxims on his disciples. What he does is to evoke them, 
to awaken them to a vigorous and various exertion of their faculties. Again 
the pupil only takes his guidance from his master. He is not bound to 
accept his master’s conclusions. There is no ingratitude in the disciple not 
accepting the maxims or the conclusions of his master. For even when he 
rejects them he is bound to acknowledge to his master in deep reverence 
“You awakened me to be myself : for that I thank you.” The master is not 
entitled to less. The disciple is not bound to give more.
It is therefore wrong to the master as well as to himself for the disciple 
to bind himself to the maxims and conclusions of his Master. His duty is to 
know the principles and if he is convinced of their value and their worth, 
to spread them. That is the wish of every Master. Jesus wished it, Buddha 
wished it. I am sure the same must be the wish of Ranade. It follows that 
if the Liberals have faith in, and love and respect for Ranade their supreme 
duty lies not merely in assembling together to sing his praises but in 
organising themselves for spreading the Gospel of Ranade.
What hope is there of the Liberals coming forward to fulfil this duty? 
Signs are very depressing. In the last election the Liberals did not even 
contest the seats. That of course is in itself a matter of some surprise. But 
this pales into nothing when one recalls the announcement made by the 
Rt. Hon’ble Srinivas Shastri—the Leading Light of the Liberal Party— that 
he wished the Congress to succeed ! ! There is no parallel to this except 
in the treacherous and treasonous conduct of Bhishma who lived on the 
bounty of the Kauravas but wished and worked for success to their enemies 
the Pandavas. This shows even the Liberals had lost faith in the gospel of 
Ranade. If this is the general condition of health of the Liberal Party it is 
better if the party died. It would clear the way for a new orientation and 
spare us the tedium of idle clatter of liberals and liberalism. For such an 
event even Ranade may express satisfaction from his grave.
zz
