426
 
DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES
who are entirely dependent upon such employment as the Hindus may 
choose to give them and on such wages as the Hindus may find it profitable 
to pay. In the villages in which they five they cannot engage in any trade 
or occupation, for owing to Untouchability no Hindu will deal with them. It 
is therefore obvious that there is no way of earning a living which is open 
to the Untouchables so long as they live in a Ghetto as a dependent part of 
the Hindu village.
This economic dependence has also other consequences besides the condition 
of poverty and degradation which proceeds from it. The Hindu has a Code of 
life, which is part of his religion. This Code of life gives him many privileges 
and heaps upon the Untouchable many indignities which are incompatible with 
the dignity and sanctity of human life. The Untouchables all over India are 
fighting against the indignities and injustices which the Hindus in the name 
of their religion have heaped upon them. A perpetual war is going on every 
day in every village between the Hindus and the Untouchables. It does not 
see the light of the day. The Hindu Press is not prepared to give it publicity 
lest it should injure the cause of their freedom in the eyes of the world. The 
existence of a grim struggle between the Touchables and the Untouchables 
is however a fact. Under the village system the Untouchables has found 
himself greatly handicapped in his struggle for free and honourable life. It is 
a contest between the Hindus who are economically and socially strong and 
the Untouchables who are economically poor and numerically small. That the 
Hindus most often succeed in suppressing the Untouchables is due to many 
causes. The Hindus have the Police and the Magistracy on their side. In a 
quarrel between the Untouchables and the Hindus the Untouchables will never 
get protection from the Police and justice from the Magistrate. The Police and 
the Magistracy naturally love their class more than their duty. But the chief 
weapon in the armoury of the Hindus is economic power which they possess 
over the poor Untouchables living in the village. The proposal may be dubbed 
escapism. But the only alternative is perpetual slavery.
PART III—CLAUSE 1
No country which has the problem of Communal majority and Communal 
minority is without some kind of an arrangement whereby they agree to share 
political power. South Africa has such an understanding. So has Canada. The 
arrangement for sharing political power between the English and the French 
in Canada is carried to the minutes office. In referring to this fact Mr. Porritt 
in his book on the Evolution of the Dominion of Canada says :
“Conditions at Ottawa, partly due to race and language, and partly to 
long-prevailing ideas as to the distribution of all government patronage, 
have militated against the Westminster precedent of continuing a member 
in the chair for two or three parliaments, regardless of the fortunes of 
political parties at general elections. There is a new speaker at Ottawa
