COMMUNAL DEADLOCK AND A WAY TO SOLVE IT
361
bothering about Indeed, the provision contained in the present Government 
of India Act could be adopted as the best compromise.
Having regard to this I cannot see why a Constituent Assembly is necessary 
to incubate a constitution. So much of the Constitution of India has already 
been written out in the Government of India Act, 1935, that it seems to be 
an act of supererogation to appoint a Constituent Assembly to do the thing 
ever again. All that is necessary is to delete those sections of the Government 
of India Act, 1935, which are inconsistent with Dominion Status.
The only function which could be left to a Constituent Assembly is to find 
a solution of the Communal Problem. I am quite positive that whatever be 
the terms of reference of the Constituent Assembly, the Communal Question 
should not form a part of them. Consider the composition of the Constituent 
Assembly as suggested by the Sapru Committee. The total membership is 
fixed at 160. The election is by joint electorates by members of the Provincial 
Legislative Assemblies under a system of proportional representation and the 
decision is to be by three-fourths of the members present and voting. Can a 
minority accept this Constituent Assembly as a safe body, in the impartiality 
of which it can place implicit confidence ? The answer to this question must 
depend upon what answers one can give to two other questions : Does it 
guarantee that the representatives of a minority elected to the Assembly will 
be its true representatives ? Secondly, does it guarantee that the decision of 
the Assembly with regard to the claims of any particular minority will not 
in fact be an imposition on the minority ? On neither of these two questions 
can I confidently say that a minority need have no cause for fear. 
Before taking up these questions, let me point out what differences there 
are between the Cripps Constituent Assembly and the Sapru Constituent 
Assembly. They may be stated as follows :
 (i) The total number for the Constituent Assembly fixed by the Sapru 
Committee is 160. Sir Stafford Cripps had not fixed any number. But 
the provision contained in his proposal that the Constituent Assembly 
shall consist of ten per cent of the total number of members of the 
Provincial Legislatures virtually fixed the number to about 158—a 
difference of only 2.
 (ii) The method of election to the Constituent Assembly by the Sapru 
Committee is by joint electorate under the system of proportional 
representation. In this there is no difference between the Cripps plan 
and the Sapru plan for the composition of the Constituent Assembly.
 (iii) Under the Cripps plan, there was no communal reservation. The 
Sapru plan departs from the Cripps plan in this respect, in as 
much as it reserves seats for particular communities in prescribed 
