STATES AND MINORITIES
403
Clause 1
(1) Governments—Union and State—shall be required to assume financial 
responsibility for the higher education of the Scheduled Castes and shall 
be required to make adequate provisions in their budgets. Such Provisions 
shall form the first charge on the Education Budget of the Union and State 
Government.
(2) The responsibility for finding money for secondary and college education 
of the Scheduled Castes in India shall be upon the State Governments and 
the different States shall make a provision in their annual budgets for the 
said purpose in proportion to the population of the Scheduled Castes to the 
total budget of the States.
(3) The responsibility for finding money for foreign education of the 
Scheduled Castes shall be the responsibility of the Union Government and 
the Union Government shall make a provision of rupees 10 lakhs per year 
in its annual budget in that behalf.
(4) These special grants shall be without prejudice to the right of 
the Scheduled Castes to share in the expenditure incurred by the State 
Government for the advancement of primary education for the people of 
the State.
Clause 2
1. The following provision shall be made in the Constitution of the Union 
Government : 
 (i) There shall be a Settlement Commission under the new Constitution to 
hold uncultivated lands belonging to the State in trust for Settlement 
of the Scheduled Castes in separate villages.
 (ii) The Union Government shall set apart annually a fund of Rs. 5 
crores for the purpose of promoting the scheme of settlement.
 (iii) That the Commission shall have the power to purchase any land 
offered for sale and use it for the said purpose.
2. The Union Government shall from time to time pass such legislation 
as may be necessary for the Commission to carry out its functions.
PART III—SANCTION FOR SAFEGUARDS AND AMENDMENT OF SAFEGUARDS
Clause 1
The Constitution of the United States shall provide that—
The United States of India undertakes to give the safeguards contained 
in Article II Section IV a place in the Constitution and 
make them a part of the Constitutional Law of India.
Provision for New 
Settlements.
(For explanation. 
see pages 425-26)
Sanction for 
safeguards.
(For explanation, 
see pages 426-28)
