COMMUNAL DEADLOCK AND A WAY TO SOLVE IT
377
not lend support to the absolutistic rule of majority rule on which the Hindu 
has been insisting upon.
Let me illustrate the point from the constitution of the United States. 
Take the clause embodying Fundamental Rights. What does that clause 
mean ? It means that, matters included in Fundamental Rights are of such 
supreme concern that a mere majority rule is not enough to interfere with 
them. Take another illustration also from the Constitution of the United 
States. The Constitution says that no part of the Constitution shall be altered 
unless the proposition is carried by three-fourths majority and ratified by the 
States. What does this show ? It shows that the United States Constitution 
recognizes for certain purposes mere majority rule is not competent.
All these cases are of course familiar to many a Hindu. The pity of it is, 
he does not read from them the correct lesson. If he did, he would realize 
that the rule of the majority rule is not as sacrosanct a principle as he thinks 
it is. The majority rule is not accepted as a principle but is tolerated as a 
rule. I might also state why it is tolerated. It is tolerated for two reasons; 
(1) because the majority is always a political majority and (2) because the 
decision of a political majority accepts and absorbs so much of the point of 
view of the minority that the minority does not care to rebel against the 
decision.
In India, the majority is not a political majority. In India the majority is 
born ; it is not made. That is the difference between a communal majority 
and a political majority. A political majority is not a fixed or a permanent 
majority. It is a majority which is always made, unmade and remade. A 
communal majority is a permanent majority fixed in its attitude. One can 
destroy it, but one cannot transform it. If there is so much objection to 
a political majority, how very fatal must be the objection to a communal 
majority ?
It may be open to the Hindus to ask Mr. Jinnah, why in 1930 when he 
formulated his fourteen points he insisted upon the principle of majority 
rule to such an extent that one of the fourteen points stipulated that in 
granting weightage, limits should be placed whereby a majority shall not 
be reduced to a minority or equality. It may be open to the Hindus to ask 
Mr. Jinnah, if he is in favour of a Muslim majority in Muslim Provinces, 
why he is opposed to a Hindu Majority in the Centre ? The Hindu 
must however realize that these posers may lead to the conclusion, that 
Mr. Jinnah’s position is inconsistent. They cannot lead to the affirmation of 
the principle of majority rule.
The abandonment of the principle of majority rule in politics cannot affect 
the Hindus very much in other walks of life. As an element in social life they 
will remain a majority. They will have the monopoly of trade and business 
which they enjoy. They will have the monopoly of the property which they
