116
 
DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES
“6. That in case he brings any goods on shore more than he can sell on 
the island within the space of 12 months, he shall have liberty to transport 
them to what port he pleases, without paying custom for exportation.
“7. That in case any person be indebted to him, and also to other Banias, 
and be not able to pay all his debts, his right may be preferred before 
other Banias.
“8. That in case of war or any other danger which may succeed, he 
shall have a warehouse in the castle to secure his goods, treasure, and 
family therein.
“9. That he or any of his family shall have liberty of egress and regress to 
and from the fort or residence of the Governor or Deputy Governor; that they 
shall be received with civil respect and be permitted to sit down according 
to their qualities; that they shall freely use coaches, horses or palanquins 
and quitasols (that is barsums or umbrellas) for their convenience without 
any disturbances ; that their servants may wear swords and daggers, shall 
not be abused, beaten or imprisoned except they offend, and that in case 
of any of his kindred or friends shall come to visit him or them from any 
other ports, they shall be used with civility and respect.
“10. That he and his assigns shall have liberty to sell and buy coconuts, 
betelnuts, pan or betel-leaves, and any other commodity not rented out 
without any molestation on the island.”
33. How this petition of Nima Parakh was disposed of can be seen 
from the reply of the Deputy Governor of Bombay dated 3rd April, 1677, 
which was in the following terms :
“According to order we have considered the articles of Nima Parakh 
Bania, which if we rightly understand we do not apprehend any prejudice 
in their concession the most of them being what the meanest enjoy.
“The first is very easy, the Company having vast ground enough, and 
we daily do the same to Banias and others who come to inhabit here. As 
to the second, the free exercise of religion is permitted to all with the 
use of their ceremonies at weddings and feast, the Banias always burning 
their dead without molestation. Neither do we permit any person to kill 
anything near the Banias who all live by themselves, much less can any 
person presume to enter into anybody’s house or compound without the 
owner’s license ; and, for forcing people to turn Christian against their 
wills, the whole world will vindicate us ; neither are any persons forced 
to carry burdens against their wills. No Bania, Brahman, Moor, or such 
man is obliged to watch or ward or other duty, but if any person buys 
an oart or warge (vada) he is bound on every alarm to send a musquiter. 
But if he possesses no land no duty is exacted, so the articles may be
