 
THOUGHTS ON LINGUISTIC STATES
163
Those who are going to rule Maharashtra are not Marathas by speech but 
Marathas by caste, notwithstanding the hopes of the Brahmins. Now it cannot 
be denied that Marathas are politically the most backward community. It is 
fundamental that they should receive political training. If there is only one 
Maharashtra only one Maratha can be trained as Chief Minister and five or 
six as Ministers. On the other hand if there are three Maharashtra States, 
three Marathas can find training as Chief Ministers and thirty Marathas 
can get training as Ministers. We can do real service to ourselves by helping 
to educate our Masters.
The only way of educating the Marathas is to give them more field for 
developing their abilities and exercising their abilities. Only the creation of 
three Maharashtras can do this.
There is a story which is very appropriate to the occasion. The father of 
a young girl had taken her for an outing in a jungle. She found that under 
big trees there stood small shrubs. Finding this to be uniformly so, she 
asked her father why these small shrubs under the big trees do not grow. 
The father not being a botanist could not give an answer. So he said : Oh ! 
I do not know. He, however, felt that the question was very significant. He 
was a Professor in a college. Next day he went to the college and put the 
question to his Botanist colleague. The Botanist replied : Why ! The answer 
is simple. The big trees use up all the sun’s rays to themselves. The shrubs 
do not get any rays. That is why they do not grow. The Marathwada people 
must not forget the moral of this story.
The only argument in favour of United Maharashtra is that it is like a 
meeting of the two brothers Rama and Bharat in Ramayana after a long 
separation. It is a silly argument, not worth consideration.
There are some Maharashtrians who are satisfied with some kind of 
Political Treaty with Western Maharashtra guaranteeing some concessions. 
Treaties are like scraps of paper. They cannot be enforced. Instead of political 
treaties which nobody can enforce is it not better to have power in one’s 
own hands ?
What a poor and wretched show by Maharashtrians in the Government 
of Bombay ! If this is the show that the most advanced and educated part 
of Maharashtrians can make, what can be expected from the people of 
Marathwada ?
I advise the people of Marathwada or Central Maharashtra to have a 
State of their own so that they have power in their own hands to improve 
their own lot.
V
RECLAMATION OF LOST TERRITORY
Should all the Marathi-speaking people be huddled up under one State ? 
Or should they be divided into two or more States.
