404
 
DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES
Clause 2
The provisions for the Scheduled Castes shall not be altered, amended or 
abrogated except in the following manner :
Any amendment or abrogation of Section IV of Article II or any part thereof 
relating to the Scheduled Castes shall only be made by a Resolution passed in the 
manner prescribed below by the more Popular Chamber of the Union Legislature :
 (i) Any proposal for amendment or abrogation shall be initiated in the form 
of a Resolution in the more Popular Chamber of the Union Legislature.
 (ii) No such Resolution shall be moved—
 (a) unless 25 years have elapsed after the Constitution has come 
into operation and has been worked ; and
 (b) unless six months’ notice has been given to the House by the 
mover of his intention to move such a Resolution.
 (iii) On the passing of such a Resolution, the Legislature shall be dissolved and 
a new election held.
 (iv) The original Resolution in the form in which it was passed by the previous 
Legislature shall be moved afresh in the same House of the newly elected 
Union Legislature.
 (v) The Resolution shall not be deemed to have been carried unless it is 
passed by a majority of two-thirds of the members of the House and also 
two-thirds of members of the Scheduled Castes who have been returned 
through separate electorates.
PART IV—PROTECTION OF SCHEDULED CASTES IN THE INDIAN STATES
The Constitution of the United States shall provide that 
the admission of the Indian States into the Union shall be 
subject to the following condition :
“All provisions relating to the Scheduled Castes contained in Section IV of Article II 
of the Constitution of the United States of India shall be extended to the Scheduled 
Castes in the Indian States. Such a provision in the Constitution of an Indian States 
shall be a condition precedent for its admission into the Union.”
PART V—INTERPRETATION
I. For the purposes of Article II the Scheduled Castes, as defined in the Government 
of India Scheduled Caste Order, 1936, issued under the Government 
of India Act, 1935, shall be deemed to be a minority.
II. For the purposes of Article II a Caste which is a Scheduled Caste in one 
State shall be treated as Scheduled Caste in all States of 
the Union.
Mode of Amendment 
of safeguards.
(For explanation, see 
page 428).
Safeguards for 
Scheduled Castes in 
Indian States.
(For explanation, 
see page 428)
Scheduled Castes 
a Minority.
(For explanation, 
see page 428)
Scheduled Castes and 
change of Domicile.
(For explanation, see 
page 428)
