STATES AND MINORITIES
423
Musalmans are marked by social discrimination. To put the point 
in a somewhat different manner, the nature of the electorates is 
determined not by reference to religion but by reference to social 
considerations. That it is social considerations and not religious 
affiliation or disaffiliation which is accepted as the basis of 
determining the nature of the electorates is best illustrated by the 
arrangements made under the Government of India Act (1935) for 
the Christian community in India. The Christian community is 
divided into three sections—Europeans, Anglo-Indians and Indian 
Christians. In spite of the fact that they all belong to the same 
religion, each section has a separate electorate. This shows that 
what is decisive is not religious affiliation but social separation.
 (iii) To urge that separate electorates prevent solidarity between the 
Untouchables and the Caste Hindus is the result of confused 
thinking. Elections take place once in five years. Assuming there were 
joint electorates, it is difficult to understand how social solidarity 
between the Hindus and the Untouchables can be promoted by 
their devoting one day for voting together when out of the rest of 
the five years they are leading severally separate lives ? Similarly, 
assuming that there were separate electorates it is difficult to 
understand how one day devoted to separate voting in the course 
of five years can make for greater separation than what already 
exist ? Or contrarywise, how can one day in five years devoted to 
separate voting prevent those who wish to work for their union 
from carrying out heir purposes. To make it concrete, how can 
separate electorate for the Untouchables prevent inter-marriage or 
inter-dining being introduced between them and the Hindus ? It is 
therefore futile to say that separate electorates for the Untouchables 
will perpetuate separation between them and the Hindus.
 (iv) To insist that separate electorates create anti-national spirit is 
contrary to experience. The Sikh have separate electorates. But no 
one can say that the Sikhs are anti-national. The Muslims have 
had separate electorates right from 1909. Mr. Jinnah had been 
elected by separate electorates. Yet, Mr. Jinnah was the apostle 
of Indian Nationalism up to 1935. The Indian Christians have 
separate electorates. Nonetheless a good lot of them have shown 
their partiality to the Congress if they have not been actually 
returned on the Congress ticket. Obviously, nationalism and anti-
nationalism have nothing to do with the electoral system. They are 
the result of extra electoral forces.
 (v) This argument has no force. It is nothing but escapism. Be that as it 
may, with free India any objection to separate electorates on such 
a ground must vanish.
