234
 
DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES
reason of the English channel England was immune from foreign aggression 
while she was repairing her own body politic and therefore it became safe 
for people to fight against their King for Liberty and also safe for the King 
to allow it to his people. This importance of shelter was also emphasized by 
Abraham Lincoln. In a speech devoted to showing why American Political 
Institutions were destined to remain perpetual, Lincoln said :
“All the armies of Europe, Asia and Africa combined. . . with a Bonaparte 
for a Commander, could not by force take a drink from Ohio, or make a track 
on the Blue Ridge in a trial of a thousand years.”
In this Lincoln was also emphasizing the importance and the necessity 
for shelter for social reconstruction. India is not a sheltered country as 
England and America are. She lies across and on the roads, whether the 
roads are land routes, sea routes or air routes. As she has no shelter the 
fear is that she will be broken up if she is attacked from outside while she 
is engaged in refitting herself. India needs a dry dock as a shelter for the 
period of her refitting and the British Empire is a dry dock for her. Who 
can say that Ranade was not wise in asking his countrymen to bear in mind 
the importance of a shelter which the British Empire can give and which 
India needs so much?
A servient nation is always eager to cut the knot and declare its 
independence of the dominant nation. But it seldom stops to consider the effect 
of independence on itself. Such a consideration is however very important. 
It is not often realized that the knot which binds the servient nation to 
the dominant nation is more necessary to the servient nation than to the 
dominant nation. It depends upon the conditions inside the servient nation. 
The servient nation may be one whole. The servient nation may consist of 
parts. The parts may be such that they will never become one whole. Or 
the parts may be such that they are not yet one whole but if held together 
longer they will become one whole. The effect which the cutting of the knot 
will have on the servient nation will depend upon the internal condition 
of the servient nation. There may be every good in cutting the knot by 
a servient nation which is one whole. Nothing good or nothing worse can 
happen—depends upon how one looks at it—by the cutting of the knot by a 
nation in which the parts can never become one whole. But there is positive 
danger in the third case. The premature cutting of the knot is sure to lead 
to disintegration where integration is desirable and possible. It would be a 
wanton act. This is the second danger which Ranade wanted to caution his 
countrymen against.
Who can say that Ranade was not wise in giving this caution ? Those who 
are inclined to question its necessity have only to look to China. It is 30 years 
since the Chinese Revolution took place. Have the Chinese settled down ? No. 
People are still asking “when will the Chinese revolution stop revolving ?”
