112
 
DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES
POINTS (1) AND (2)
Verdict of History
26. These points can be considered both in the light of history as well 
as of geography. I am, however, convinced that history cannot help us to 
decide the issue. In the first place, how far back must we go to find the 
data on which to base our conclusion. It is obvious that the history of the 
ancient past would be of no use to us in this connection. What could be 
of use to us is the past of the present. One may go further and question 
any reliance being placed upon such a past of the present for drawing 
any conclusion that can have a bearing on the issue before us. Most of 
the contacts between people during historical times have been between 
conquerors and conquered. This is true of India as well as of Europe. But 
the results of such contacts have been quite different in Europe and in India. 
In Europe such contacts have produced assimilation of the conflicting social 
elements. Frequent inter-marriages have confounded the original stocks. 
One language, either the most useful or the most commonly spoken, has 
tended to supplant the other. If one civilization is superior to the others 
in the same country it has automatically supplanted them. This natural 
tendency towards assimilation which we see in Europe is so strong that 
steps have to be taken to counteract it. What is the tendency in India ? It 
is definitely against assimilation. The Musalmans conquered Hindus. But 
the Musalmans remained Musalmans and the Hindus remained Hindus. 
The Gujarathis were conquered by Maharashtrians and were ruled by them 
for some years. What effect has it produced upon the Gujarathis ? Nothing. 
Gujarathis have remained Gujarathis and Maharashtrians have remained 
Maharashtrians. The Chalukyas conquered Maharashtrians and so did the 
Shilahars. But there was no assimilation between them. The Shilahars and 
Chalukyas remained what they were and so did the Maharashtrians. This 
being the case, what help can Indian History give in the decision of the 
issue ? The history of internal upheavals as well as of external aggressions 
has been nothing more than a passing show. Conquest means nothing and 
proves nothing.
Verdict of Geography
27. Let us now turn to geography and ask for its verdict. It seems to 
be a better witness than history. For this purpose one must consider the 
location of Bombay in relation to the Province of Maharashtra. The Province 
of Maharashtra once it is created will be triangular in shape. One side of 
this triangle is formed by the Western Coast Line of India between Daman 
in the North and Karwar in the South. The City of Bombay lies in between 
Daman and Karwar. The Province of Gujarat starts from Daman and 
spreads northwards. The Kanada Province starts from Karwar and spreads 
southwards. It is about 85 miles South of Daman which is the starting point 
of Gujarat, and 250 miles North of Karwar, which is the starting point of
