416
 
DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES
Clause 2
The proposal cannot be controversial. The best remedy against tyranny 
and oppression by a majority against the minority is inquiry, publicity and 
discussion. This is what the safeguard provides for. A similar proposal 
was also recommended by the Sapru Committee.
Clause 3
Social boycott is always held over the heads of the Untouchables by 
the Caste Hindus as a sword of Democles. Only the Untouchables know 
what a terrible weapon it is in the hands of the Hindus. Its effects and 
forms are well described in the Report made by a Committee appointed 
by the Government of Bombay in 1928 to investigate the grievances of 
the Depressed Classes and from which the following extracts are made. 
It illuminates the situation in a manner so simple that everybody can 
understand what tyranny the Hindus are able to practise upon the 
Untouchables. The Committee said:
“Although we have recommended various remedies to secure to the 
Depressed Classes their rights to all public utilities we fear that there will 
be difficulties in the way of their exercising them for a long time to come. 
The first difficulty is the fear of open violence against them by the orthodox 
classes. It must be noted that the Depressed Classes form a small minority 
in every village, oppose to which is a great majority of the orthodox who are 
bent on protecting their interests and dignity from any supposed invasion by 
the Depressed Classes at any cost. The danger of prosecution by the Police 
has put a limitation upon the use of violence by the orthodox classes and 
consequently such cases are rare.
The second difficulty arises from the economic position in which the 
Depressed Classes are found today. The Depressed Classes have no economic 
independence in most parts of the Presidency. Some cultivate the lands of 
the orthodox classes as their tenants at will. Others live on their earnings as 
farm labourers employed by the orthodox classes and the rest subsist on the 
food or grain given to them by the orthodox classes in lieu of service rendered 
to them as village servants. We have heard of numerous instances where the 
orthodox classes have used their economic power as a weapon against those 
Depressed Classes in their villages, when the latter have dared to exercise their 
rights, and have evicted them from their land, and stopped their employment 
and discontinued their remuneration as village servants. This boycott is 
often planned on such an extensive scale as to include the prevention of the 
Depressed Classes from using the commonly used paths and the stoppage of 
sale of the necessaries of life by the village Bania. According to the evidence,
