295
 
FEDERATION VERSUS FREEDOM
mercial, racial or otherwise, are really matters of common concern and as 
such proper to be assigned to a common government. But the maintenance 
of the line, as fixed by the federating agreement, is of the essence of modern 
federalism; at least, as exhibited in the three great Anglo Saxon federations 
today, the United States of America, the Commonwealth of Australia, and 
the Dominion of Canada. Hence the importance and gravity of the duty 
thrown upon the Courts as the only constitutional interpreter of the organic 
instrument which contains the fundamental law of the land.”.
Thus to draw a line for the purpose of dividing the powers of Government 
between the Central and Local Governments by the law of the Constitution 
and to maintain that line through the judiciary are the two essential 
features of the Federal Form of Government. It is these two features 
which distinguish it from the Unitary Form of Government. In short 
every federation involves two things : (1) Division of Powers by metes and 
bounds between the Central Government and the Units which compose 
it by the law of the Constitution, which is beyond the power of either 
to change and to limit the action of each to the powers given and (2) a 
Tribunal beyond the control of either to decide when the issue arises as 
to whether any particular act of the Centre or of the Unit, Legislative, 
Executive, Administrative or Financial is beyond the powers given to it 
by the Constitution.
Having explained what is meant by Federal Government, I will now 
proceed to give you some idea of the Powers which are assigned by the 
constitution to the Federal Government.
(a) Legislative Powers of the Federation
For the purposes of distributing the Legislative Powers the possible 
subjects of Legislation are listed into three categories. The first category 
includes subjects, the exclusive right to legislate upon which is given to 
the Federal Legislature. This list is called the Federal List. The second 
category includes subjects, the exclusive right to legislate upon which is 
given to the Provincial Legislature. The list is called the Provincial List. 
The third category includes subjects over which both the Federal as well 
as the Provincial Legislature have a right to legislate. This list is called 
the Concurrent list. The scope and contents of these lists are given in 
Schedule VII to the Government of India Act.
In accordance with the fundamental principles of Federation a law made 
by the Federal Legislature if it relates to a matter which is included in 
the Provincial List, would be ultra vires and a nullity. Similarly, if the 
Provincial Legislature were to make a law relating to a matter falling 
in the Federal List such a Provincial Law would be ultra vires and 
therefore a nullity. This is, however declared by statute and section 107 is
