312
 
DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES
against British Indians in the matter of right to employment in Indian States 
continues. For, Indian States are not required to declare that British Indians 
shall be deemed to be eligible for service under them. That notwithstanding 
Federation such an anomaly should exist shows that this Federation is a 
freak.
Secondly, this difference in citizenship shows itself in the terms of the 
oath prescribed for members of the Legislature by Schedule IV.
In the case of a member who is a British subject the form of the oath 
is as under :
“I, A.B., having been elected (or nominated or appointed) a member of this 
Council (or Assembly), do solemnly swear (or affirm) that I will be faithful 
and bear true allegiance to His Majesty the King, Emperor of India, His heirs 
and successors, and that I will faithfully discharge the duty upon which I am 
about to enter.”
In the case of a person who is a subject of a Ruler of an Indian State 
the form of the oath is as follows :
“I, A.B., having been elected (or nominated or appointed) a member of this 
Council (or Assembly), do solemnly swear (or affirm) that saving the faith and 
allegiance which I owe to C.D., his heirs and successors, I will be faithful and 
bear true allegiance in any capacity as Member of this Council (or Assembly) 
to His Majesty the King, Emperor of India, His heirs and successors, and that 
I will faithfully discharge the duty upon which I am about to enter.”
The subject of an Indian State, it is obvious from the terms of the oath, 
owes a double allegiance. He owes allegiance to the ruler of his State and 
also to the King. Superficially the position seems not very different from 
what one find in the United States. In the United States the individual is 
a citizen of the Union as well as of the State and owes allegiance to both 
powers. Each power has a right to Command his obedience. But ask the 
question, to which, in case of conflict, is obedience due and you will see the 
difference between the two. On this question this is what Bryce has to say :
“The right of the State to obedience is wider in the area of matters which it 
covers. Prima facie every State-law, every order of a competent State authority 
binds the citizen, whereas the National government has but a limited power; it 
can legislate or command only for certain purposes or on certain subjects. But 
within the limits of its power, its authority is higher than that of the State, 
must be obeyed even at the risk of disobeying the State.
“Any act of a State Legislature or a State Executive conflicting with 
the Constitution, or with an act of the National Government, done under 
the Constitution, is really an act not of the State Government, which
