292
 
DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES
“acting after consultation” may be distinguished from cases relating to 
“individual judgment” in this way. In cases relating to “individual judgment” 
the authority vests in the Ministers. The Governor-General has the power 
to superintend and, if necessary, overrule. In the cases falling under “after 
consultation”, the authority belongs to the Governor-General and the Ministers 
have the liberty to say what they wish should be done.
(c) The Federal Judiciary
The Government of India Act provides for the constitution of a Federal 
Court as part of the Federal Constitution. The Federal Court is to consist of a 
Chief Justice and such Puisne Judges as His Majesty thinks necessary, their 
number not to exceed six until an address is presented by the Legislature 
asking for an increase. The Federal Judiciary has original as well as appellate 
jurisdiction. Section 204, which speaks of the Original Jurisdiction of the 
Federal Court, prescribes that, that Court shall have exclusive Original 
Jurisdiction in any dispute between the Federation, the Provinces and the 
federated States which involves any question of law or fact on which the 
existence or extent of a legal right depends. This section, however, provides 
that if a State is party then the dispute must concern the interpretation of 
the Act or an Order in Council thereunder, or the extent of the legislative or 
executive authority vested in the Federation by the Instrument of Accession 
or arise under an Agreement under Part VI of the Act for the administration 
of a federal law in the States, or otherwise concern some matter in which 
the Federal Legislature has power to legislate for the States or arise under 
an agreement made after federation with the approval of the Representative 
of the Crown between the States and the Federation or a Province, and 
includes provision for such jurisdiction. Even this limited jurisdiction of 
the Federal Court over the States is further limited by the proviso that no 
dispute is justiciable if it arises under an agreement expressly excluding 
such jurisdiction.
The appellate jurisdiction of the Federal Court is regulated by section 
205 and section 207. Section 205 says that an appeal shall lie to the 
Federal Court from any judgment, decree or final order of a High Court in 
British India if the High Court certified that the case involves a substantial 
question of law as to the interpretation of this Act or an Order in Council 
made thereunder. Section 207 relates to appeal from decision of Courts of 
the Federated States. It says that an appeal shall be to the Federal Court 
from a Court in a federated State on the ground that a question of law has 
been wrongly decided, being a question which concerns the interpretation of 
this Act or of any Order in Council made thereunder or the extent of the 
legislative or executive authority vested in the Federation by virtue of the 
Instrument of Accession of that State or arises under an Agreement made 
under Part VI of this Act in relation to the administration in that State of 
a law of the Federal Legislature ; but sub-section (2) to section 207 provides
