COMMUNAL DEADLOCK AND A WAY TO SOLVE IT
365
was exactly what happened to the Irish Treaty. The Irish Treaty continued 
to override the Irish Constitution so long as Ireland was not a Dominion. 
But the moment Ireland became a Dominion the over riding power of the 
Treaty was taken away by a short and simple enactment of the Parliament 
of the Irish Free State and the British Parliament did nothing, for it knew 
that Ireland was a Dominion and therefore it could do nothing. How so 
absurd a provision came to be put forth by so eminent a person to assure 
the minorities, I am unable to understand.
The provisions contained in the Sapru proposals appear to be an 
improvement. But are they really an improvement ? I am sure they are not. 
A three-fourths majority of 160 means that a view to prevail must have the 
support of 120 members. Before accepting this as an improvement, one has 
to have some idea as to how this group of 120 is likely to be formed. If the 
Hindus and the Muslims combine they will together make up 102 and will 
need only 18 more to make up 120. Most of the special seats and a few more 
from others may easily fall into the hands of this combine. If this happens the 
decision of the Assembly will obviously be an imposition upon the Scheduled 
Castes, the Sikhs, the Indian Christians etc. Similarly, if the Muslims are 
isolated the decision will not be a joint decision but an imposition upon the 
Muslims by non-Muslims. These possibilities of permutation and combination 
for the purpose of check-mating or out-manouvering of some communities 
by others, I am sorry to say, have not been taken into consideration by 
the Sapru Committee. There would have been some safety, if the Sapru 
Committee had provided that the three-fourths majority shall at least include 
50 per cent of each element.
Following upon the procedure adopted in the making of the constitution of 
the United States, the Sapru Committee could have added a further provision 
for the ratification at any rate of the communal part of the decision of the 
Assembly by the representatives of the minorities outside the Assembly. None 
of these provisions finds a place in the plan of the Constituent Assembly as 
designed by the Sapru Committee. Consequently the Constituent Assembly 
has become a snare.
There are many other arguments against the plan of a Constituent 
Assembly. I may mention one, which I confess has influenced me greatly. 
When I read the history of the Union between Scotland and England, I was 
shocked at the corruption and bribery that was practised to win the consent 
of the Scottish Parliament. The whole of the Scottish Parliament was bought. 
The chances of corruption and bribery being used in the Indian Constituent 
Assembly to buy over members to support decisions desired by interested 
groups are very real. Their effects, I am sure, cannot be overlooked. If this 
happens, it will not only make mockery of the Constituent Assembly but I 
feel quite certain that any attempt made to enforce its decisions will result 
in a civil war. It is my considered opinion that the proposal of Constituent 
Assembly is more dangerous than profitable and should not be entertained.
