104
 
DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES
 
 situation as it existed in the old Turkish Empire or in the old 
Austro-Hungarian Empire.
 (iii) The demand for Linguistic Provinces is an explosive force of the 
same character which was responsible for blowing up the old 
Turkish Empire or Austro-Hungarian Empire. It is better not to 
allow it to get too hot when it may become difficult to prevent an 
explosion.
 (iv) So long as the Provinces were not democratic in their constitutions 
and so long as they did not possess the widest sovereign powers 
which the new constitution gives them the urgency of Linguistic 
Provinces was not very great. But with the new constitution, the 
problem has become very urgent.
The solution of the difficulties
9. If the problem must be dealt with immediately what is to be the 
solution ? As has already been pointed out, the solution must satisfy two 
conditions. While accepting the principle of Linguistic Provinces it must 
provide against the break-up of India’s unity. My solution of the problem 
therefore is that, while accepting the demand for the re-constitution of 
Provinces on linguistic basis, the constitution should provide that the 
official language of every Province shall be the same as the official 
language of the Central Government. It is only on that footing that I am 
prepared to accept the demand for Linguistic Provinces.
10. I am aware of the fact that my suggestion runs counter to the 
conception of Linguistic Provinces which is in vogue. It is that the 
language of the Province shall be its official language. I have no objection 
to Linguistic Provinces. But I have the strongest objection to the language 
of the Province being made its official language where it happens to be 
different from the official language of the Centre. My objection is based 
on the following considerations :
 (1) The idea of having a Linguistic Province has nothing to do with the 
question of what should be its official language. By a Linguistic 
Province, I mean a Province which by the social composition of 
its population is homogeneous and therefore more suited for the 
realization of those social ends which a democratic Government 
must fulfil. In my view, a Linguistic Province has nothing to do with 
the language of the Province. In the scheme of Linguistic Provinces, 
language has necessarily to play its part. But its part can be limited 
to the creation of the Province, i.e., for demarcation of the boundaries 
of the Province. There is no categorical imperative in the scheme 
of Linguistic Provinces which compels us to make the language of 
the Province its official language. Nor is it necessary, for sustaining 
the cultural unity of the Province, to make the language of the
