414
 
DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES
The problem of the Untouchables is a formidable one for the Untouchables 
to face. The Untouchables are surrounded by a vast mass of Hindu population 
which is hostile to them and which is not ashamed of committing any 
inequity or atrocity against them. For a redress of these wrongs which 
are matters of daily occurrence, the Untouchables have to call in the 
aid of the administration. What is the character and composition of this 
administration ? To be brief, the administration in India is completely 
in the bauds of the Hindus. It is their monopoly. From top to bottom it 
is controlled by them. There is no Department which is not dominated 
by them. They dominate the Police, the Magistracy and the Revenue 
Services, indeed any and every branch of the administration. The next 
point to remember is that the Hindus in the administration have the same 
positive anti-social and inimical attitude to the Untouchables which the 
Hindus outside the administration have. Their one aim is to discriminate 
against the Untouchables and to deny and deprive them not only of the 
benefits of Law, but also of the protection of the Law against tyranny and 
oppression. The result is that the Untouchables are placed between the 
Hindu population and the Hindu-ridden administration, the one committing 
wrong against them and the other protecting the wrong-doer, instead of 
helping the victims.
Against this background, what can Swaraj mean to the Untouchables ? It 
can only mean one thing, namely, that while today it is only the administration 
that is in the hands of the Hindus, under Swaraj the Legislature and 
Executive will also be in the hands of the Hindus. It goes without, saying 
that such a Swaraj would aggravate the sufferings of the Untouchables. 
For, in addition to an hostile administration, there will be an indifferent 
Legislature and a callous Executive. The result will be that the administration 
unbridled in venom and in harshness, uncontrolled by the Legislature and 
the Executive, may pursue its policy of inequity towards the Untouchables 
without any curb. To put it differently, under Swaraj the Untouchables 
will have no way of escape from the destiny of degradation which Hindus 
and Hinduism have fixed for them.
These are special considerations against the introduction of the British 
System of Executive which have their origin in the interests of the minorities 
and the Scheduled Castes. But there is one general consideration which 
can be urged against the introduction of the British Cabinet System in 
India. The British Cabinet System has undoubtedly given the British 
people a very stable system of Government. Question is will it produce 
a stable Government in India ? The chances are very slender. In view of 
the clashes of castes and creeds there is bound to be a plethora of parties 
and groups in the Legislature in India. If this happens it is possible, nay 
certain, that under the system of Parliamentary Executive like the one that 
prevails in England under which the Executive is bound to resign upon an
