STATES AND MINORITIES
421
elections : (1) Primary election and (2) Final election. The Primary election 
is by a separate electorate of the Scheduled Castes. It is only a qualifying 
election and determines who is entitled to stand in the Final election on 
behalf of the Scheduled Castes for the seats reserved to them. The Final 
election is by a joint electorate in which both caste Hindus and the Scheduled 
Castes can vote and the final result is determined by their joint vote.
2. Clause 5 of the Poona Pact has limited the system of Primary election 
to ten years which means that any election taking place after 1947 will 
be by a system of joint electorates and reserved seats pure and simple.
3. Even if the Hindus agreed to extend the system of double election 
for a further period it will not satisfy the Scheduled Castes. There are 
two objections to the retention of the Primary election. Firstly, it does 
not help the Scheduled Castes to elect a man who is their best choice. As 
will be seen from Appendix III, the Scheduled Caste candidate who tops 
the poll in the Primary election fails to succeed in the Final election and 
the Scheduled Caste candidate who fails in the Primary election tops the 
poll in the Final election. Secondly, the Primary election is for the most 
part a fiction and not a fact. In the last election, out of 151 seats reserved 
for the Scheduled Castes there were Primary elections only in 43. This is 
because it is impossible for the Scheduled Castes to bear the expenses of 
two elections—Primary and Final. To retain such a system is worse than 
useless.
4. Things will be much worse under the system of joint electorates and 
reserved seats which will hereafter become operative under the terms of the 
Poona Pact. This is no mere speculation. The last election has conclusively 
proved that the Scheduled Castes can be completely disfranchised in a 
joint electorate. As will be seen from the figures given in Appendix III, 
the Scheduled Caste candidates have not only been elected by Hindu votes 
when the intention was that they should be elected by Scheduled Caste 
votes but what is more the Hindus have elected those Scheduled Caste 
candidates who had failed in the Primary election. This is a complete 
disfranchisement of the Scheduled Castes. The main reason is to be found 
in the enormous disparity between the voting strength of the Scheduled 
Castes and the caste Hindus in most of the constituencies as may be seen 
from figures given in Appendix III. As the Simon Commission has observed, 
the device of the reserved seats ceases to be workable where the protected 
community constitutes an exceedingly small fraction of any manageable 
constituency. This is exactly the case of the Scheduled Castes. This disparity 
cannot be ignored. It will remain even under adult suffrage. That being 
the case, a fool-proof and a knave-proof method must be found to ensure 
real representation to the Scheduled Castes. Such a method must involve 
the abolition of—
 (i) the Primary election as a needless and heavy encumbrance; and
