343
 
FEDERATION VERSUS FREEDOM
of India including the Indian States. My contention is that the creation of 
Autonomous Provinces does not require the creation of a Central Government 
for the whole of India.
The establishment of Autonomous Provinces in British India will call for 
two things; (1) That there shall be a Central Government for British India and 
(2) that the form of that Central Government must be federal and not unitary. 
The essence of Federation lies in the division or allocation of Legislative and 
Executive Powers between the Central Government and the Units by law. 
The powers of the Units and the Centre are defined and demarcated and 
the one is not entitled to invade the domain of the other. Autonomy of the 
Provinces means that their powers are defined and vested in them. To make 
Provincial Autonomy real the Powers of the Central Government must also 
be limited, otherwise it would be in a position to invade the domain of the 
Provinces. To put it simply, autonomy means definition and delimitation of 
Powers by law and wherever there is definition and delimitation of powers 
between two Political Bodies there is and there must be Federation. You 
will now understand why I said that all that Provincial Autonomy demands 
is that the Central Government for British India shall be Federal in form. 
It does not justify all India Federation. Why is it necessary to bring in the 
States still remains to be answered and those who plead for this All-India 
Federation as distinct from British India Federation must answer this 
question.
As I said all that is necessary is that Central Government for British 
India shall be Federal in form and this fact has been recognized by the 
Constitution.
Many seemed to have failed to notice that the Government of India Act, 
1935 establishes two distinct Federations. One is a federation which is a 
federation of the Provinces of British India another which is a Federation 
of British Indian Provinces and the Indian States. It is surprising that so 
many should have missed so important a fact. That the Government of India 
Act establishes two federations is beyond dispute. To those who have any 
doubt they should read Parts III and XIII together and Part II and Part III 
together. Part II and Part III reveal that there is an All-India Federation 
and lay down the constitution of that Federation. Part III and Part XIII 
reveal that there is a Federation of British India Provinces apart from the 
States and lay down the Constitution of that Federation. That Part XIII 
relates to provisions which are called transitional does not make the British 
India Scheme any the less a Federation, because the law is law whether it 
is for a limited period or for all times.
That the Act establishes a Federation for British India Provinces and 
also an All-India Federation cannot be denied. What is the difference 
between these two Federations ? Is there any difference in the Legislative
