170
 
DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES
Separate electorates or reservation of seats must not be restored to. It 
would be enough to have plural member constituencies (of two or three) 
with cumulative voting in place of the system of single-member constituency 
embodied in the present Constitution. This will allay the fears which the 
minorities have about Linguistic States.
PART V
THE NEED FOR A SECOND CAPITAL
CHAPTER 11
INDIA AND THE NECESSITY OF A SECOND CAPITAL
A WAY TO REMOVE TENSION BETWEEN 
THE NORTH AND THE SOUTH
Can India afford to have one Capital ? That India has now one capital does 
not close the question. If the Capital of India is not satisfactorily located, 
now is the time for considering the question.
Since the departure of the British, India has only one capital and that 
is Delhi. Before the British, India has always had two capitals. During the 
Moghal period, India had Delhi as one Capital and Shrinagar in Kashmir 
as another Capital. When the British came they too had two capitals, 
one was Calcutta and another was Simla. Even when they left Calcutta 
for Delhi, they retained Simla as their summer Capital. The two capitals 
maintained by the Moghuls and by the British were the results of climatic 
conditions. Neither the British nor the Moghuls were able to live in Delhi or 
in Calcutta continuously for 12 months. The summer months in Delhi were 
unbearable to the Moghuls. They made Shrinagar their second capital for 
summer months. The summer months in Calcutta were equally unbearable 
to the British. They, therefore, established a second capital. To these climatic 
conditions must now be added three other conditions. There was no popular 
Government when the Moghuls ruled or when the British ruled. Now we 
have popular Government and the convenience of the people is an important 
factor. Delhi is most inconvenient to the people of the South. They suffer 
the most from cold as well as distance. Even the Northern people suffer in 
the summer months. They do not complain because they are nearer home 
and they are nearer the seat of power. Second is the feeling of the Southern 
people and the third is the consideration of Defence. The feeling of the 
Southern people is that the Capital of their Country is far away from them 
and that they are being ruled by the people of Northern India. The third 
consideration is of course more important. It is that Delhi is a vulnerable 
place. It is within bombing distance of the neighbouring countries. Although 
India is trying to live in peace with its neighbours it cannot be assumed 
that India will not have to face war sometime or other and if war comes, 
the Government of India will have to leave Delhi and find another place for
