 
MAHARASHTRA AS A LINGUISTIC PROVINCE
115
if your Honours would please to favour them with a line in answer to their 
letter, it would be a great comfort to them and no disadvantage to your interest.”
32. What were the privileges which the Gujarathi Banias had asked 
for from the East India Company ? The following petition by one Nima 
Parakh, an eminent Bania belonging to the City of Diu, gives some idea 
of what they were :11
“That the Honourable Company shall allot him so much ground in or 
near the present, town free of rent as shall be judged necessary to build 
a house or warehouse thereon.
“2. That he with the Brahmans of Vers (Gors or priests) of his caste shall 
enjoy the free exercise of their religion within their own houses without the 
molestation of any person whatsoever ; that no Englishman, Portuguese, or 
other Christian nor Muhammadan shall be permitted to live within their 
compound or offer to kill any living creature there, or do the least injury 
or indignity to them, and if any shall presume to offend them within the 
limits of their said compound, upon their complaint to the Governor (at 
Surat), or Deputy Governor (at Bombay), the offenders shall be exemplarily 
punished ; that they shall have liberty to burn their dead according to their 
custom, also to use their ceremonies at their weddings ; and that none of 
their profession of what age, sex or condition whatever they be, shall be 
forced to turn Christians, nor to carry burthens against their wills.
“3. That he and his family shall be free from all duties of watch and 
ward, or any charge and duty depending thereon ; that neither the Company 
nor the Governor, Deputy Governor or Council, or any other person, shall 
on any pretence whatsoever force them to lend money for public or private 
account or use any indirect.
“4. That in case there falls out any difference or suit in law between 
him or his vakil or attorneys or the Banias of his caste, and any other 
persons remaining on the island, the Governor or Deputy Governor shall 
not suffer him or them to be publicly arrested dishonoured or carried to 
prison, without first giving him due notice of the cause depending, that he 
or they may cause justice to be done in an honest and amicable way and 
in case any difference happen between him or his attorney and any Bania 
of their own caste, they may have liberty to decide it among themselves 
without being forced to go to law.”
“5. That he shall have liberty of trade in his own ships and vessels to 
what port he pleases, and come in and go out when he thinks good, without 
paying anchorage, having first given the Governor or Deputy Governor or 
customer notice and taken their consent thereunto.
11. Bombay Gazetteer, Vol. I, pp. 74-76.
