 
THOUGHTS ON LINGUISTIC STATES
145
The fact that they have been held together uptil now is not in the 
natural course of things. It is due to the fact that both of them are bound 
by the Congress discipline. But how long is the Congress going to last ? 
The Congress is Pandit Nehru and Pandit Nehru is Congress. But is Pandit 
Nehru immortal ? Any one who applies his mind to these questions will 
realize that the Congress will not last till the sun and the moon. It must one 
day come to an end. It might come to an end even before the next election. 
When this happens the State of Bombay will find itself engaged in civil war 
and not in carrying on administration.
We therefore want linguistic States for two reasons. To make easy the 
way to democracy and to remove racial and cultural tension.
In seeking to create linguistic States India is treading the right road. It is 
the road which all States have followed. In the case of other linguistic States 
they have been so, from the very beginning. In the case of India she has to 
put herself in the reverse gear to reach the goal. But the road she proposes 
to travel is well-tried road. It is a road which is followed by other States.
Having stated the advantages of a linguistic State I must also set out 
the dangers of a linguistic State.
A linguistic State with its regional language as its official language 
may easily develop into an independent nationality. The road between an 
independent nationality and an independent State is very narrow. If this 
happens, India will cease to be Modern India we have and will become the 
medieval India consisting of a variety of States indulging in rivalry and 
warfare.
This danger is of course inherent in the creation of linguistic States. 
There is equal danger in not having linguistic States. The former danger a 
wise and firm statesman can avert. But the dangers of a mixed State are 
greater and beyond the control of a statesman however eminent.
How can this danger be met ? The only way I can think of meeting the 
danger is to provide in the Constitution that the regional language shall not 
be the official language of the State. The official language of the State shall 
be Hindi and until India becomes fit for this purpose English. Will Indians 
accept this ? If they do not, linguistic States may easily become a peril.
One language can unite people. Two languages are sure to divide people. 
This is an inexorable law. Culture is conserved by language. Since Indians 
wish to unite and develop a common culture it is the bounden duty of all 
Indians to own up Hindi as their language.
Any Indian who does not accept this proposal as part and parcel of a 
linguistic State has no right to be an Indian. He may be a hundred per cent 
Maharashtrian, a hundred per cent Tamil or a hundred per cent Gujarathi,
