428
 
DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES
allow the minorities to share political power nor is it willing to respect any 
convention made in that behalf as is evident from their repudiation of the 
obligation (to include representatives of the minorities in the cabinet) contained 
in the Instrument of Instructions issued to the Governors in the Government 
of India Act of 1935. Under these circumstances there is no way left but to 
have the rights of the Scheduled Castes embodied in the Constitution.
PART III—CLAUSE 2
This is not a new demand. It replaces Clause 6 of the Poona Pact which 
provides that the system of representation for the Scheduled Castes by 
reserved seats shall continue until determined by mutual consent between 
the communities concerned in the settlement. Since there is no safe method 
of ascertaining the will of the Scheduled Castes as to how to amend and alter 
the safeguards provided for them it is necessary to formulate a plan which will 
take the place of Clause 6 of the Pact. Provisions having similar objectives to 
those contained in the proposal exist in the Constitution of Australia, America 
and South Africa.
In dealing with a matter of this sort two considerations have to be borne 
in mind. One is that it is not desirable to rule out the possibility of a change 
in the safeguards being made in the future by the parties concerned. On 
the other hand it is by no means desirable to incessant struggle over their 
revision. If the new Union and State Legislatures are to address themselves 
successfully to their responsibilities set out in the preamble it is desirable 
that they should not be distracted by the acute contentions between religions 
and classes which questions of change in the safeguards are bound to raise. 
Hence a period of twenty-five years has been laid down before any change 
could be considered.
PART IV
The object of this prevision is to see that whatever safeguards are provided 
for the Scheduled Castes in British India are also provided for the Scheduled 
Castes in the Indian States. The provision lays down that an Indian State 
seeking admission to the Union shall have to satisfy that its Constitution 
contains these safeguards.
PART V—INTERPRETATION
Whether the Scheduled Castes are a minority or not has become a matter of 
controversy. The purpose of First Provision to set this controversy at rest. The 
Scheduled Castes are in a worst position as compared to any other minority 
in India. As such they required and deserve much more protection than any 
other minority does. The least one can do is to treat them as a minority.
The purpose of Second Provision is to remove the provincial bar. There is 
no reason why a person who belongs to Scheduled Castes in one Province 
should lose the benefit of political privileges given by the Constitution merely 
because he happens to change his domicile.
