408
 
DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES
such a provision to ensure that all citizens shall have equal benefit of Laws, 
Rules and Regulations.
The provisions of Clause 2 are borrowed from Civil Rights Protection Act, 
1866, and of March 1st, 1875 passed by the Congress of the United States 
of America to protect the Negroes against unequal treatment.
Clause 3
Discrimination is another menace which must be guarded against if the 
Fundamental Rights are to be real rights. In a country like India where 
it is possible for discrimination to be practised on a vast scale and in a 
relentless manner Fundamental Rights can have no meaning. The Remedy 
follows the lines adopted in the Bill which was recently introduced in the 
Congress of the U.S.A. the aim of which is to prevent discrimination being 
practised against the Negroes.
Clause 4
The main purpose behind the clause is to put an obligation on the State 
to plan the economic life of the people on lines which would lead to highest 
point of productivity without closing every avenue to private enterprise, 
and also provide for the equitable distribution of wealth. The plan set out 
in the clause proposes State ownership in agriculture with a collectivised 
method of cultivation and a modified form of State Socialism in the field 
of industry. It places squarely on the shoulders of the State the obligation 
to supply capital necessary for agriculture as well as for industry. Without 
the supply of capital by the State neither land nor industry can be made to 
yield better results. It also proposes to nationalize insurance with a double 
objective. Nationalized Insurance gives the individual greater security than 
a private Insurance Firm does inasmuch as it pledges the resources of the 
State as a security for the ultimate payment of his insurance money. It also 
gives the State the resources necessary for financing its economic planning 
in the absence of which it would have to resort to borrowing from the money 
market at a high rate of interest. State Socialism is essential for the rapid 
industrialization of India. Private enterprize cannot do it and if it did it 
would produce those inequalities of wealth which private capitalism has 
produced in Europe and which should be a warning to Indians. Consolidation 
of Holdings and Tenancy Legislation are worse than useless. They cannot 
bring about prosperity in agriculture. Neither Consolidation nor Tenancy 
Legislation can be of any help to the 60 millions of Untouchables who 
are just landless labourers. Neither Consolidation nor Tenancy Legislation 
can solve their problem. Only collective farms on the lines set out in the 
proposal can help them. There is no expropriation of the interests concerned. 
Consequently there ought to be no objection to the proposal on that account.
The plan has two special features. One is that it proposes State Socialism 
in important fields of economic life. The second special feature of the
