 
THOUGHTS ON LINGUISTIC STATES
161
may not take it seriously. But there are other arguments which arise out of 
the present condition and which cannot be ignored. I mention a few.
My first argument is that a single Government cannot administer such 
a huge State as United Maharashtra.
The total population of the Marathi-speaking area is 3,30,83,490. The 
total area occupied by the Marathi-speaking people is 1,74,514 sq. miles. 
It is a vast area and it is impossible to have efficient administration by 
a single State. Maharashtrians who talk about Samyukta Maharashtra 
have no conception of the vastness as to the area and population of their 
Maharashtra. But why there should be one single Maharashtrian State. I 
am quite unable to understand. To have a separate Maharashtra State is 
one thing. To have a  single. Maharashtra State is quite a different thing. 
I am in favour of a separate Maharashtra, separate from Gujarathis and 
separate from Hindi-speaking people. But I am unable to understand why a 
free Maharashtra should be made into one single State. The Maharashtrians 
are not planning to declare war on U.P. and therefore they need not have 
a common front.
Even from the point of view of Marathas why should there be this 
consolidation ? What affiliation has a Maratha of Satara got with the 
Maratha of Aurangabad ? What affiliation has a Maratha of Nasik got with 
the Maratha of Ratnagiri? What care and interest a Maratha of Satara is 
going to bestow upon the problems of the Maratha of Aurangabad ? What 
care and interest a Maratha of Nasik is going to bestow upon the problems 
of the Maratha of Ratnagiri ? The consolidation has no meaning and can 
serve no purpose.
All Maratha Ministers in the present Bombay Cabinet come from Satara 
District or Nasik District. There is none from Konkan.
The second consideration is the economic inequality between the three 
parts of Maharashtra. Marathwada has been solely neglected by the Nizam. 
What guarantee is there that the other two Maharashtras will look after 
the interests of what I call the Central Maharashtra ?
The third consideration is industrial inequality between the three parts 
of Maharashtra. Western Maharashtra and Eastern Maharashtra are 
industrially well developed. What about the Central Maharashtra ? What 
guarantee is there of its industrial development ? Will Western Maharashtra 
and Eastern Maharashtra take interest in the industrial development of 
Central Maharashtra ?
The fourth consideration is the inequality of education between Eastern 
and Western Maharashtra on the one hand and Central Maharashtra on the 
other. The inequality between them is marked. If the Central Maharashtra 
goes under the Poona University its destiny is doomed.
