213
 
RANADE, GANDHI AND JINNAH
the past. In politics when this process of petrifaction is reached we call it 
Bourbonism and the sure sign of the Bourbon is that, being unconscious that 
he is the victim of sclerosis, he sees no reason for seeking a cure. Unable to 
adjust himself to changed and new conditions he falls back into the past as an 
old man drops into his worm-out arm-chair.”
The other kind of situation is not one of decay but of destruction. The 
possibilities of it are always present whenever there is a crisis. The old 
ways, old habits and old thoughts fail to lift society and lead it on. Unless 
new ones are found there is no possibility of survival. No society has a 
smooth sailing. There are periods of decay and possibilities of destruction 
through which every society has to pass. Some survive, some are destroyed, 
and some undergo stagnation and decay. Why does this happen? What is 
the reason that some survive ? Carlyle has furnished an answer. He puts 
in his characteristic way:
“No time need have gone to ruin, could it have found a great enough, a man 
wise and good enough; Wisdom to discern truly what the Time wanted, valour 
to lead it on to the right road thither, these are the salvation of any Time.”
This seems to me to be quite a conclusive answer to those who deny man 
any place in the making of history. The crisis can be met by the discovery 
of a new way. Where there is no new way found, society goes under. Time 
may suggest possible new ways. But to step on the right one is not the work 
of Time. It is the work of man. Man therefore is a factor in the making of 
history and that environmental forces whether impersonal or social if they 
are the first are not the last things.
III
Who can be called a great man ? If asked of military heroes such as 
Alexander, Attila, Caesar and Tamerlane, the question is not difficult to 
answer. The militarymen make epochs and effect vast transitions. They 
appal and dazzle their contemporaries by their resounding victories. They 
become great without waiting to be called great. As the lion is among the 
deer, so they are among men. But it is equally true that their permanent 
effect on the history of mankind is very small. Their conquests shrink, and 
even so great a General as Napoleon after all his conquests left France 
smaller than he found it. When viewed from a distance they are seen to 
be only periodical, if necessary, incidents in the world’s movement, leaving 
no permanent mark on the character of the society in which they live The 
details of their career and their moral may be interesting, but they do not 
affect society and form no leaven to transform or temper the whole.
The answer becomes difficult when the question is asked about a person 
who is not a military general. For, it then becomes a question of tests, and 
different people have different tests.
