297
 
FEDERATION VERSUS FREEDOM
 (c) to the exercise of such rights, authority and jurisdiction as are 
exercisable by His Majesty by treaty, grant, usage, sufference, or 
otherwise in and in relation to the tribal areas.
There is no difficulty in following the provisions of this sub-section. There 
might perhaps be some difficulty in understanding sub-clause (a). It says 
that the executive powers must be co-extensive with the legislative powers 
of the Federation. Now the legislative power of the Federation extends not 
only to the Federal List but also to the Concurrent List. Does the executive 
power of the Federation extend to subjects included in the Concurrent List ? 
Two points must be borne in mind before answering this question. First, the 
Concurrent List is also subject to the legislative authority of the Province. 
Second, according to section 49(2) that the executive authority of each 
Province extends to the matters with respect to which the Legislature of the 
Province has power to make laws. The answer to the question whether the 
executive authority of the Federation extends also to the Concurrent list is 
that the Executive Authority in respect of the Concurrent List belongs to 
the Federal Government as well as to the Provincial Government. This is 
clear from the terms of section 126(2). It belongs to Provincial Government 
except in so far as the Federal Legislature has covered the field. It belongs 
to the Federal Government except in so far as the Provincial Legislature 
has covered the field.
The Concurrent List is not the only list which is subject to Legislation by 
the Federal Legislature. The Federal Legislature has the right to legislate 
even on Provincial subjects under Section 102 in cases of emergency and under 
Section 106 to give effect to international agreements. Does the Executive 
Authority of the Federation extend to such matters also ? The answer is 
that when a field is covered by Federal Legislation that field also becomes 
the field of Executive Authority of the Federation.
(c) Administrative Powers of the Federation
The Administrative Powers of the Federation follow upon the Executive 
Powers of the Federation just as the Executive Powers of the Federation 
follow upon the Legislative Powers of the Federation.
To this there is one exception. That exception relates to the administration 
of subjects included in the Concurrent List. The Concurrent List is a list 
to which the Legislative Authority of the Federation extends by virtue of 
Section 100. As has already been pointed out the executive authority of the 
Federation extends in so far as Federal Legislation has covered the field. 
But the administrative powers for subjects falling in the Concurrent List do 
not belong to the Federation. They belong to the Provinces.
(d) Financial Powers of the Federation
The revenues of the Federal Government are derived from four different 
sources : (1) Revenue from Commercial Enterprise, (2) Revenue from
