296
 
DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES
now the law on the point. Cases of conflict of legislation touching the Federal 
List and the Provincial List are not likely to occur often. But cases of conflict 
between the two are sure to arise in the concurrent field of legislation. The 
law as to that you will find in section 107. Sub-section (1) lays down when a 
Federal Law shall prevail over a Provincial Law. Sub-section (2) lays down 
as to when a Provincial Law shall prevail over the Federal Law. Reading 
the sub-sections together the position in law is this. As a rule a Federal Law 
shall prevail over a Provincial Law if the two are in conflict. But in cases 
where the Provincial Law, having been reserved for the consideration of 
the Governor-General or for the signification of His Majesty’s pleasure, has 
received the assent of the Governor-General or His Majesty, the Provincial 
Law shall prevail until the Federal Legislature enacts further legislation with 
respect to the same matter.
With regard to the question of this distribution of powers of legislation every 
Federation is faced with a problem. That problem arises because there can be 
no guarantee that enumeration of the subjects of legislation is exhaustive and 
includes every possible subject of legislation. However complete and exhaustive 
the listing may be there is always the possibility of some subject remaining 
unenumerated. Every Federation has to provide for such a contingency and 
lay down to whom the powers to legislate regarding these residuary subjects 
shall belong. Should they be given to the Central Government or should they 
be given to the Units ? Hitherto there has been only one way of dealing with 
them. In some Federations, these residuary powers are given to the Central 
Government, as in Canada. In some Federations they are given to the Units, 
as in Australia. The Indian Federation has adopted a new way of dealing 
with them. In the Indian Federation they are neither assigned to the Central 
Government nor to the Provinces. They are in a way vested in the Governor-
General by virtue of section 104. When a Legislation is proposed on a subject 
which is not enumerated in any of the three lists it is the Governor-General, 
who is to decide whether the powers shall be exercised by the Federal 
Legislature or by the Provincial Legislature.
(b) Executive Powers of the Federation
The first question is, what is the extent of the executive powers of the 
Federation ? Is it co-extensive with the legislative powers ? In some of 
the Federations this was not made clear by statute. It was left to judicial 
decision. Such is the case in Canada. The Indian Constitution does not leave 
this matter to courts to decide. It is defined expressly in the Act itself. The 
relevant section is section 8(1). It says that the executive authority of the 
Federation extends—
 (a) to matters with respect to which the Federal Legislature has powers 
to make laws ;
 (b) to raising in British India on behalf of His Majesty of naval, military 
and air forces and to the governance of His Majesty’s forces borne on 
the Indian establishment;
