STATES AND MINORITIES
405
Appendix I
EXPLANATORY NOTES
Preamble
The Preamble gives constitutional shape and form to the Resolution on 
objectives passed by the Constituent Assembly on Wednesday the 22nd 
January 1947.
ARTICLE I—Section I
Clauses 1 to 4
The admission of the six hundred and odd Indian States into the Union 
raises many difficult questions. The most difficult of them is the one which 
relates to their admission into the Union. Every Indian State is claiming 
to be a Sovereign State and is demanding to be admitted into the Union 
in its own right. The Indian States fall into different classes from the view 
of size, population, revenue and resources. It is obvious that every State 
admitted into the Union as a State must have the capacity to bear the 
burden of modern administration to maintain peace within its own borders 
and to possess the resources necessary for the economic advancement of its 
people. Otherwise, the United States of India is likely to be encumbered 
with a large number of weak States which, instead of being a help to the 
Central Government, will be a burden upon it. The Union Government with 
such small and weak States as its units will never be able to pull its full 
weight in an emergency. It is therefore obvious that it would be a grave 
danger to the future safety of India if every Indian State were admitted into 
the Union without any scrutiny of its capacity to bear the burden of modern 
administration and maintaining internal peace. To avoid this danger, the 
Article proceeds to divide the Indian States into two classes: (1) Qualified 
Indian States and (2) Unqualified Indian States. It proposes that a list of 
Qualified Indian States should be drawn up as a first step in the procedure 
to be followed for the admission of the Indian States into the Union. A 
Qualified Indian State will be admitted into the Union on an application 
for admission and the fulfilment of the provisions of the Enabling Act which 
the Union Legislature is authorized to pass for the purpose of requiring 
an appropriate form of internal Government set up within the State which 
will be in consonance to the principles underlying the Constitution of the 
United States of India. The territory in the occupation of the Unqualified 
Indian States will be treated as the territory of the United States of India 
and will be reorganized into States of suitable sizes by the United States of 
India. In the meantime those who are rulers of the territory shall continue to 
administer the territory under the supervision of the United States of India. 
The Act also declares that the Indian territory whether in the occupation 
of British Indian Provinces or of the Indian States is one and integral and 
will be so even though an Indian State has not entered into the Union.
