COMMUNAL DEADLOCK AND A WAY TO SOLVE IT
367
because it has no case for safeguards but only because the bully on whom the 
bill of rights is presented thinks that because the community is not politically 
organized to have sanctions behind its demand he can successfully bluff.
All this differential treatment is due to the fact, that there are no principles, 
which are accepted as authoritative and binding on those who are parties to the 
Communal Question. The absence of principles has another deleterious effect. It 
has made impossible for public opinion to play its part. The public only knows 
methods and notes that one method has failed another is being suggested. It 
does not know why one method has failed and why another is said to be likely 
to succeed. The result is that the public, instead of being mobilized to force 
obstinate and recalcitrant parties to see sense and reason, are only witnessing 
the discussions of Communal Questions whenever they take place is mere shows.
The approach I am making for the solution of the Communal Problem is 
therefore based upon two considerations :
 (1) That in proceeding to solve the Communal Problem it is essential to 
define the governing principles which should be invoked for determining 
the final solution, and
 (2) That whatever the governing principles they must be applied to all 
parties equally without fear or favour. 
V
PROPOSALS FOR SOLUTION OF THE COMMUNAL PROBLEM
Having made my position clear on certain preliminary points, I will now 
proceed to deal with the subject. 
The Communal Problem raises three questions :
 (A) The question of representation in the Legislature ;
 (B) The question of representation in the Executive; and
 (C) The question of representation in the Services.
A. REPRESENTATION IN PUBLIC SERVICES
To take the last question first. This can hardly be said to be a subject of 
controversy. The principle that all communities should be represented in the 
Public Services in a prescribed proportion and no single community should be 
allowed to have a monopoly has been accepted by the Government of India. This 
principle has been embodied in the Government of India Resolutions of 1934 
and 1943 and rules to carry it out have been laid down. It has even prescribed 
that any appointment made contrary to the rules shall be deemed to be null and 
void. All that is necessary is to convert administrative practice into statutory 
obligation. This can be done by adding a Schedule to the Government of India 
Act, which will include the provisions contained in these Resolutions and similar 
provisions for the different provinces and make the Schedule a part of the Law 
of the Constitution.
