102
 
DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES
4. Among the many effects that may be envisaged, the following are obvious :
 (1) Linguistic Provinces will result in creating as many nations as there 
are groups with pride in their race, language and literature. The 
Central Legislature will be a League of Nations and the Central 
Executive may become a meeting of separate and solidified nations 
filled with the consciousness of their being separate in culture and 
therefore in interests. They may develop the mentality of political 
insubordination, i.e., refusal to obey the majority or of staging walk-
outs. The development of such a mentality is not to be altogether 
discounted. If such a mentality grows it may easily make the working 
of the Central Government impossible.
 (2) The creation of Linguistic Provinces would be fatal to the maintenance 
of the necessary administrative relations between the Centre and the 
Provinces. If each Province adopts its own language as its official 
language the Central Government will have to correspond in as 
many official languages as there are Linguistic Provinces. This must 
be accepted as an impossible task. How great a deadlock Linguistic 
Provinces will create in the working of the Governmental machine can 
be better understood by studying the effects of Linguistic Provinces 
on the Judiciary. In the new set-up, each Province will have a High 
Court with a series of subordinate courts below it. At the apex of 
these High Courts will be the Supreme Court with the right to 
hear appeals against the decisions of the High Courts. On the basis 
of Linguistic Provinces, Courts of each Province including its High 
Court will conduct their proceedings in the language of the Province. 
What is the Supreme Court to do when its jurisdiction is invoked 
for rectifying a wrong done by the High Court ? The Supreme Court 
will have to close down. For, if it is to function — every judge of 
the Supreme Court — I am omitting for the moment the lawyers 
practising therein — must know the language of every Province — 
which it is impossible to provide for.
No one can contemplate such a situation with equanimity. It may lead to a 
break-up of India. Instead of remaining united, India may end in becoming 
Europe — faced with the prospect of chaos and disorder.
Advantages from Linguistic Provinces
5. While it is true that the proposal of Linguistic Provinces creates a 
problem which goes to the very root of the matter — inasmuch as it affects the 
unity of India — there can be no doubt that the reconstruction of Provinces 
on linguistic basis has certain definite political advantages.
6. The main advantage of the scheme of Linguistic Provinces which 
appeals to me quite strongly is that Linguistic Provinces would make
