SMALL HOLDINGS IN INDIA AND THEIR REMEDIES
469
much deliberation the system of field assessment was finally adopted 
is known to many. But as the reasons that led to its adoption are 
known only to a few the following explanatory parts from the Joint 
report will be found to be both interesting and instructive:
“Para 6. That one manifest advantage of breaking up the 
assessment of a village into portions so minute [as indicated by 
a survey number] is the facility it affords to the cultivators of 
contracting or enlarging his farm from year to year, according 
to the fluctuating amount of agricultural capital at their 
disposal which is of incalculable importance to farmers possessed 
of so limited resources as those of the cultivating classes throughout 
India.
“Para 7. The loss of a few bullocks by disease or other causes 
may quite incapacitate a ryot from cultivating profitably the extent 
of land he had previously in village and, without the privilege of 
contracting his farm, and consequent liabilities on occassion of such 
loss, his ruin would be very shortly consummated.”19
Judging in the light of this conclusion the proposal to regulate the 
size of holdings appears ill-considered and futile. For as Prof. Richard 
T. Ely observes20 :
“Obviously no simple answer can be given to the question [as to 
what should be the size of a farm]. The value of land or the rent it will 
bring is perhaps the most important factor…………………In addition 
to the factor of rent the amount of capital that he can command, 
the kind of fanning in which he is most skilled, the character of the 
labour he can secure, the proximity of markets, and the adequacy 
of transportation facilities, all must be taken into account by the 
farmer in determining how large a farm he will attempt to manage 
and how intensively he will farm it.
“This question is primarily one of private profit which the individual 
must decide for himself, but the legislator and the scientific student 
can be of some assistance in helping to develope that most difficult 
branch of commercial science—farm accounting—and in keeping the 
farmer alive to those charges in prices, wages, and transportation 
charges to which the farm organization must adjust itself.”
To those who have the temerity to fix the size of a holding Prof. Ely’s 
well-considered opinion will bring home that in spite of good intentions 
their vicarious mission will end in disaster; for none but the cultivator 
can decide what should be the size of his holding. They would do well to 
remember that the size of his holdings will vary in time. Consequent to
19. Survey Settlement Manual Bombay Presidency, 1882. p. 3.
20. Outlines of Economics, pp. 531-32 (Italics ours).
