224
 
DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES
and why are we where we are ? It is now 50 years since the National 
Congress was born. Its stewardship has passed hands, I won’t say from 
the sane to the insane, or from realists to idealists, but from moderates 
to radicals. Where does the country stand today at the end of 50 years 
of political marching ? What is the cause of this deadlock ? The answer is 
simple. The cause of deadlock is the absence of Communal settlement. Ask 
why is communal settlement necessary for political settlement and you 
realize the fundamental importance of the stand that Ranade took. For the 
answer to this question is to be found in the wrong social system, which is 
too undemocratic, too over-weighed in favour of the classes and against the 
masses, too class conscious and too communally minded. Political democracy 
would become a complete travesty if it were built upon its foundations. That 
is why nobody except the high caste Hindus will agree to make it the case 
of a political Democracy without serious adjustments. Well may some people 
argue to their satisfaction that the deadlock is the creation of the British 
Govern ment. People like to entertain thoughts which sooth them and which 
throw responsibility on others. This is the psychology of escapism. But it 
cannot alter the fact that it is the defects of social system which has given 
rise to the communal problem and which has stood in the way of India 
getting political power.
Ranade’s aim was to cleanse the old order if not to build a new one. 
He insisted on improving the moral tone of Hindu society. If he had been 
heard and followed, the system would have at least lost its rigours and its 
rigidity. If it could not have avoided Communal settlement it would have 
made it easy. For his attempts, limited as they were, would have opened 
the way to mutual trust. But the politicals had developed a passion for 
political power which had so completely blinded them that they refused to 
see virtue in anything else. Ranade has had his revenge. Is not the grant 
of political safeguard a penalty for denying the necessity of social reform ?
How much did Ranade achieve in the field in which he played so dominant 
a part ? In a certain sense the question is not very important. Achievement 
is never the true measure of greatness. “Alas”, as Carlyle said, “we know 
very well that ideals can never be completely embodied in practice. Ideals 
must ever lie a very great way off; and we will right thankfully content 
ourselves with any not intolerable approximation thereto!” Let no man, 
as Schillar says, too querulously “measure by a scale of perfection the 
meagre product of reality” in this poor world of ours. We will esteem him 
no wise man ; we will esteem him a sickly discontented foolish man. And 
yet Ranade’s record of achievement was not altogether bare. The problems 
facing the then social reformers contained in the statement on social reform 
prepared by Rai Bahadur P. Anandcharly were five : (1) early marriage ; 
(2) remarriages of widows ; (3) liberty for our countrymen to travel—or
