120
 
DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES
One could appreciate such an argument. But those who like to use this 
argument must remember two things :
 (i) That Maharashtra is not the only place in which such a situation 
can arise. It may arise in any province. I like to refer to Bihar. In 
Bihar the land in which coal is found belongs to the people of Bihar. 
But the coal-owners are Gujarathis, Kathiawaris or Europeans. 
Is there no possibility of Biharis making a discrimination against 
Gujarathi and Kathiawari coal-owners ? Are the coalfields of Bihar 
to be excluded from the Province of Bihar and constituted into 
a separate Province in the interest of Kathiawari and Gujarathi 
coal-owners ? 
 (ii) The constitution of India has noted the possibility of discrimination 
being made against a minority and has made more than ample 
provision for preventing it. There are the fundamental rights. 
There are the provisions against discrimination; there are the 
provisions of payment of compensation, and there are the High 
Courts with the inherent rights to issue high prerogative writs both 
against individuals and Governments to stop any harm, injustice 
or harassment being done to any citizen. What more protection do 
the Gujarathi traders and industrialists of Bombay want against 
the possibility of discrimination ?
POINT (7)
Maharashtra’s eye on Bombay’s surplus
41. Before accusing Maharashtrians of having an eye on the surplus 
of Bombay it must be proved that Bombay has a surplus. What appears 
as surplus is due really to bad accounting. It is bad accounting where 
expenditure on overhead charges such as (1) the Governor and his 
establishment, (2) the Ministers and their establishments, (3) the 
Legislature and the expenditure thereon, (4) Judiciary, (5) Police and (6) 
Provincial establishments such as those of the Commissioners of Police 
and Directors of Public Instruction is not being taken into account. I 
doubt very much if on the existing basis of taxation, Bombay will have 
any surplus if expenditure on these items is charged to Bombay. It is a 
fallacy to charge all such expenditure to Maharashtra and exempt Bombay 
from it and then argue that Bombay has a surplus.
42. The statement that the Maharashtrians want Bombay because they 
want to live on the surplus revenue of Bombay, besides being wrong in 
fact raises a question of motive. I do not know if the Maharashtrians are 
actuated by any such motive. They are not a commercial community. Unlike 
other communities, the Maharashtrians have no nose for money, and I am 
one of these who believe that it is one of their greatest virtues. Money has 
never been their god. It is no part of their culture. That is why they have
