238
 
DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES
will result in loss of freedom for despotism is antithetical of freedom whether 
the despotism is native or foreign. It is a pity Indians have lost sight of this 
fact. But I have no doubt those who are shouting that the Congress is the 
only party and that the Congress is the nation will live to rue their decision.
Why has the Liberal Party collapsed? Is there something wrong in the 
Philosophy of Ranade ? Is there anything wrong with the men in the Liberal 
Party ? Or is the working of the Liberal Party at fault ? I for one hold that 
there is nothing fundamentally wrong with the philosophy of Ranade. Nor 
can it be said that of the two the Congress has the best cause and the 
Liberal Party the best men. The Liberal Party has both. To my mind what 
has brought about the collapse of the Liberal Party is the complete lack of 
organization.
It may not be without interest to expose the weaknesses in the organization 
of the Liberal Party.
As pointed out by Pendleton Herring in his volume on Politics of Democracy 
the organization of a party is spread over three concentric rings. The centre 
ring represents the oligarchy in control of the party organization—what is 
called the High Command. There are associated with it, its workers who 
are primarily concerned with securing their livelihood through the party 
organiza tion whether as party officials or through public office. They are 
called professional politicians and constitute the party machine. Surrounding 
this inner group—the High Command and the machine—there is a large 
circle of persons bound to the party by ties of tradition and emotional 
loyalty. They think of the principles professed by the party. They are more 
concerned with its ideals and symbols than with the acts of the professional 
party workers and leaders. They vote for the party ideal rather than for the 
party record. Outside this second ring lies that vast body of people who are 
not attached to any party. It is a floating population. The reason for their 
being unattached is either because they are aimless, thoughtless or because 
they have particular interests which are not included in the platform of 
any party. Those outside the second ring constitute the most vital field of 
action for a political party. They are the prize which a party must capture. 
To capture this prize it is not enough to enunciate principles and formulate 
policies. Men are not interested in principles and policies. But they are 
interested in accomplishing things. What is necessary for a party is to bring 
about concerted action. For in the words of President Woodrow Wilson, given 
self-Government with a majority rule, things can be accomplished not by 
individual voice but by concerted action. Now for concerted action what is 
necessary is the crystallization of individual opinions into public opinion. 
This crystallization or building up of public opinion as a sanction behind a 
particular principle becomes the main functions of a party. Theoretically, 
political parties are agencies for the expression and execution of public 
opinion but in practice parties create, direct, influence and often control
