314
 
DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES
of the treasury department at Washington. The judgments of Federal Courts 
are carried out by U.S. Marshals, likewise dispersed over the country and 
supplied with a staff of assistants. This is a provision of the utmost importance, 
for it enables the central, national Government to keep its fingers upon 
the people everywhere, and make its laws and the commands of its duly 
constituted authorities respected whether the State within whose territory 
it acts be heartily loyal or not, and whether the law which is being enforced 
be popular or abnoxious. The machinery of the national Government ramifies 
over the whole union as the nerves do over the whole body, placing every 
point in direct connection with the Central executive.”.
Not one of these things can be predicated of the Indian Federation. It 
is a dependent Government and its relation with the people is not direct.
In the United States, the States as States have no place in the Central 
Government and although the States elect representatives to the Federal 
Legislature, political action at the centre does not run in State channels. 
There is no combination of States into groups and it is not the fashion for 
States to combine in an official way through their State organizations. How 
different is the Indian Federation! States, as such, have been given de jure 
recognition, they have been given de jure exemptions, and immunities from 
law. There are great possibilities of combined action and counteraction by 
States and Provinces over these exemptions and immunities. This is another 
reason which leads to the feeling that the Indian Federation will have very 
little vitality.
VI
BENEFITS OF THE FEDERAL SCHEME
The protagonists of the Federal Scheme have urged three grounds in 
favour of the acceptance of the Scheme. The first ground is that it helps to 
unite India. The second ground is that it enables British India to influence 
Indian India and to gradually transform the autocracy that is prevalent 
in Indian India into the democracy that exists in British India. The third 
ground is that the Federal Scheme is a scheme which embodies what is 
called Responsible Government.
These three arguments in favour of the Federal Scheme are urged in 
such seriousness and the authority of those who urge them is so high that 
it becomes necessary to examine the substance that underlies them.
1. Federation and the Unity of India
The advantages of common system of Government are indeed very real. 
To have a common system of law, a common system of administration and 
a feeling of oneness are some of the essentials of good life. But they are all 
the results which follow from a common life led under a common system of 
Government. Other things being equal, a federation as a common system 
of Government for the whole of India should be welcome. But does this 
Federation unite under one governmental system the whole territory called 
India in the Government of India Act, 1935 ? Is this an All India Federation ?
