231
 
RANADE, GANDHI AND JINNAH
crude which have volume but no effect and which are neither fool-proof nor 
knave-proof and which break the back even of the most earnest and sincere 
servants of the country and disable them from further effort. In short Ranade 
was like the wise Captain who knows that his duty is not to play with his 
ship clever and masterful tricks, just for effect and show in the midst of the 
ocean but to take it safely to its appointed port. In short Ranade was not 
a forged bank note and in worshipping him we have no feeling of kneeling 
before anything that is false.
In the second place this celebration of Ranade’s birthday is not all an 
act of hero-worship. Hero-worship in the sense of expressing our unbounded 
admiration is one thing. To obey the hero is a totally different kind of hero-
worship. There is nothing wrong in the former while the latter is no doubt a 
most pernicious thing. The former is only man’s respect for everything which 
is noble and of which the great man is only an embodiment. The latter is 
the villain’s fealty to his lord. The former is consistent with respect, but 
the latter is a sign of debasement. The former does not take away one’s 
intelligence to think and independence to act. The latter makes one a perfect 
fool. The former involves no disaster to the State. The latter is the source 
of positive danger to it. In short in celebrating Ranade’s birthday we are 
not worshipping a boss who is elected by no one, accountable to no one and 
removable by no one, but paying our tribute of admiration to a leader who 
led and did not drive people, who sought to give effect to their deliberate 
judgment and did not try to impose his own will upon them by trickery or 
by violence.
In the third place it is not for hero-worship for which this gathering has 
assembled. This is an occasion to remind ourselves of the political philosophy 
of Ranade. To my mind it has become necessary to remind ourselves of it 
from time to time. For his is a philosophy which is safe and sound, sure if 
slow. Even if it does not glitter it is nonetheless gold. Do any have doubt ? If 
they have let them ponder over the following utterances of Bismark, Balfour 
and Morley. Bismark the great German Statesman said :
“Politics is the game of the possible.”
Balfour in his Introduction to Walter Bagehot’s well-known book on the 
English Constitution says :
“If we would find the true basis of the long drawn process which has 
gradually converted medieval monarchy into a modern democracy the 
process by which so much has been changed and so little destroyed, we 
must study temperament and character rather than intellect and theory. 
This is a truth which those who recommend the wholesale adoption of 
British Institutions in strange lands might remember with advantage. Such 
an experiment can hardly be without its dangers. Constitutions are easily 
copied ; temperaments are not ; and if it should happen that the borrowed 
constitution and the native temperament fail to correspond, the misfit may
