 
MAHARASHTRA AS A LINGUISTIC PROVINCE
125
There is no provincial citizenship. A Gujarathi in Maharashtra will have 
the same rights of citizenship in Maharashtra as Maharashtrian will have.
Given these facts, I fail to understand what objection Prof. Gheewala can 
have to Linguistic Provinces ?
58. Prof. Gheewala has made two other recommendations. He says, (1) if 
Provinces have to be reconstituted, constitute them on rational basis rather 
than on linguistic basis and (2) make nationality a personal thing.
59. To reconstitute Provinces on economic basis—which is what is meant 
by rational basis—appears more scientific than reconstituting them on 
linguistic basis. However, unscientific linguistic reorganization of Provinces I 
cannot see how they can come in the way of rational utilization of economic 
resources of India. Provincial boundaries are only administrative boundaries. 
They do not raise economic barriers for the proper utilization of economic 
resources. If the position was that the resources contained within a Linguistic 
Province must only be explained by the people of the Province and no other 
than it could no doubt be said that the scheme of Linguistic Provinces was 
mischievous. But such is not the case. So long as Linguistic Provinces are 
not allowed to put a ban on the exploitation of the resources of the people 
by any body capably of wishing to exploit them a Linguistic Province will 
yield all the advantages of a rationally planned Province.
60. The proposal of making nationality as a personal thing and put it 
on the same footing as religion may be dismissed as being to Utopian. It 
would raise many administrative problems. It will come when the world is 
one and all nationals are its citizens. Nationality will automatically vanish 
as being quite useless.
61. So far I have dealt with the arguments advanced by those who are 
opposed to the inclusion of Bombay in Maharashtra. I have taken pains to 
do so not because I felt that they were very weighty. I did so because I felt 
it desirable to prevent the common man from being misled. The possibility 
of this happening was there and for two reasons. In the first place, those 
who have come forward with these arguments are not ordinary men. They 
are University Professors. Secondly, these Professors came out with their 
arguments after Prof. Gadgil had put forth the case for the inclusion of 
Bombay in Maharashtra. Unfortunately, no attempt has so far been made to 
refute the arguments of the adversaries of Prof. Gadgil. The result has been 
the creation of an impression that Prof. Gadgil’s adversaries have carried 
the day. It was absolutely essential to remove this impression.
The other side
62. There are however arguments which the adversaries of Prof. Gadgil 
have not thought of hut which may be advanced with justice as well as force, 
