 
THOUGHTS ON LINGUISTIC STATES
147
cause has been prevented by the provisions in the Constitution of the 
United States.
One such safeguard in the Constitution of the United States has been 
referred to by Mr. Pannikar in his dissenting minute to the Report (See 
Table No. 2).
I give below the following extract from his minute :
“I consider it essential for the successful working of a federation that the 
units should be fairly evenly balanced. Too great a disparity is likely to create 
not only suspicion and resentment but generate forces likely to undermine the 
federal structure itself and thereby be a danger to the unity of the country. 
This is clearly recognised everywhere. In most federal constitutions, though 
wide variation exists in respect of the population and resources of the unit, 
care is taken to limit the influence and authority of the larger States. Thus in 
the United States of America, for example, though the States are of varying 
population and resources and the State of New York has many times the 
population, say of Nevada, the constitution provides for equal representation 
of every State in the Senate.”
On this point Mr. Pannikar also refers to the Soviet Union and old 
Germany. This is what he says:
“In the Soviet Union also, in which great Russia has a larger population 
than most other units of the Federation taken together, representation in 
the House of Nationalities is weighed against her so that the other units of 
the Federation may not be dominated by the larger unit. In the Bismarckian 
Reich again, though Prussia had a dominant position from the point of view 
of population, she was given less representation in the Reichsrat or the 
house representing the states than she was entitled to (less than one-third) 
and the permanent presidency of that body was vested in Bavaria, clearly 
demonstrating that even here—where there was concentration of political, 
military and economic power in one State—it was considered necessary, in 
the interest of the union, to give weightage to the smaller units and also to 
reduce Prussia to the position of minority in the Reichsrat, States Council, 
which enjoyed greater powers than the Reichstag or the House of the People.”
Mr. Pannikar has however not mentioned one other safeguard in the 
Constitution of the United States against the evils of disparity. In our 
Constitution the two Houses are not co-equal in authority. But the position 
in the Constitution of the United States is quite different. In the U.S.A. 
the two Houses are co-equal in authority. Even for money bills the consent 
of the Senate is necessary. This is not so in India. This makes a great 
difference to the disparity in the population.
This disparity in the population and power between the States is sure 
to plague the country. To provide a remedy against it is most essential.
