SMALL HOLDINGS IN INDIA AND THEIR REMEDIES
459
Both these truths are painful enough to have startled many people into 
inquiring the causes of this low productivity. As a result, attention has 
now been concentrated on the excessive sub-division and fragmentation of 
agricultural holdings. Enlarge and consolidate the holdings, it is confidently 
argued, and the increase in agricultural productivity will follow in its wake!!
III
CONSOLIDATION
Consolidation of holdings is a practical problem while the enlargement of 
them is a theoretical one, demanding a discussion of the principle which can 
be said to govern their size. Postponing the consideration of the theoretical 
question of enlargement, we find that the problem of consolidation raises the 
following two issues:—(1) how to unite such small and scattered holdings as 
the existing ones, and (2) once consolidated how to perpetuate them at that 
size. Let us consider them each in turn. Sub-division of land need not involve 
what is called the fragmentation of land. But unfortunately it does, for, every 
heir desires to secure a share from each of the survey numbers composing 
the entire lands of the deceased instead of so arranging the distribution that 
each may get as many whole numbers as possible, i.e. the heirs instead of 
sharing the lands by survey numbers, claim to share in each survey number, 
thus causing fragmentation. Though fragmentation does subserve the ends 
of distributive justice it renders farming in India considerably inefficient 
as it once did in Europe. It involves waste of labour and cattle power, 
waste in hedges and boundary marks, and waste of manure. It renders 
impracticable the watching of crops, sinking of wells and the use of labour 
saving implements. It makes difficult changes in cultivation, the making of 
roads, water channels, etc., and it increases the cost of production. These 
disadvantages of fragmentation arc to be recounted only to lend their support 
to the process of restripping or consolidation. The methods of “restripping” are 
many, though all are not equally efficacious. Voluntary exchanges can hardly 
be relied upon for much. But a restricted sale of the right of occupancy may 
be expected to go a good deal. For, under it, when survey numbers are put 
to auction on account of their being relinquished by the holders or taken in 
attachment for arrears of assessments, only those may be allowed to bid in 
the auction for the sale of the right of occupancy whose lands are contiguous 
to the land hammered out. Again as further helping the process of reunion, 
the right of pre-emption may be given to farmers whose neighbour wishes to 
sell his land. These methods, it must be admitted, can achieve the desired 
result in a very small measure. The evils of fragmentation are very great 
and must be met by a comprehensive scheme of consolidation. It is, therefore, 
advocated* that if two-thirds of the Khiatedars, dealing more than half of 
*RBC, p. 38.
