290
 
DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES
With regard to the authority to sanction expenditure : here again there 
is a departure made in the accepted principles of distributing authority 
between the two Chambers when a Legislature is bi-cameral.
According to section 31(1) the Annual Financial Statement of estimated 
receipts and expenditure shall be laid before both Chambers of the Federal 
Legislature and shall, of course, be open to discussion in both the Chambers. 
Not only are they open to discussion in both the Chambers, they are also 
subject to the vote of both the Chambers. Section 34(2) requires that the 
expenditure shall be submitted in the form of demands for grants to the 
Federal Assembly and thereafter to the Council of State and either Chamber 
shall have the power to assent to or refuse any demand, or to assent to any 
demand subject to a reduction of the amount specified therein.
It will thus be seen that the two Chambers are co-equal in authority, 
both in the matter of their authority to pass laws and in the matter of 
sanctioning expenditure. A conflict between the two Chambers cannot end 
by one Chamber yielding to the other if that Chamber does not wish so to 
yield. The procedure adopted for the resolving of differences between the 
two Chambers is the method of joint sessions. Section 31(1) deals with 
the procedure with regard to joint sessions where the conflict relates to a 
bill. Section 34(3) relates to the procedure where the conflict relates to the 
differences with regard to sanctioning of expenditure.
(b) The Federal Executive
The constitution of the Federal Executive is described in section 7(1). 
According to this section the executive Authority of the Federation is handed 
over to the Governor-General. It is he who is the Executive Authority for the 
Federation. The first thing to note about this Federal Executive is that it is 
a unitary executive and not a corporate body. In India ever since the British 
took up the civil and military government of the country, the executive has 
never been unitary in composition. The executive was a composite executive. In 
the Provinces it was known as the Governor-in-Council. At the Centre it was 
known as the Governor-General-in-Council. The civil and military government 
of the Provinces as well as of India was not vested either in the Governor or 
in the Governor-General. The body in which it was vested was the Governor 
with his Councillors. The Councillors were appointed by the King and did not 
derive their authority from the Governor-General. They derived their authority 
from the Crown and possessed co-equal authority with the Governor and the 
Governor-General and, barring questions where the peace and tranquillity of 
the territory was concerned, the Governor and the Governor-General were 
bound by the decision of the majority. The constitution, therefore, makes a 
departure from the established system. I am not saying that this departure is 
unsound in principle or it is not justified by precedent or by the circumstances 
