228
 
DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES
Politics in the hands of these two great men have become a competition 
in extravaganza. If Mr. Gandhi is known as Mahatma, Mr. Jinnah must be 
known as Qaid-i-Azim. If Gandhi has the Congress, Mr. Jinnah must have 
the Muslim League. If the Congress has a Working Committee and the 
All-India Congress Committee, the Muslim League must have its Working 
Committee and its Council. The session of the Congress must be followed 
by a session of the League. II the Congress issues a statement the League 
must also follow suit. If the Congress passes a Resolution of 17,000 words, 
the Muslim League’s Resolution must exceed it by at least a thousand 
words. If the Congress President has a Press Conference, the Muslim League 
President must have his. If the Congress must address an appeal to the 
United Nations, the Muslim League must not allow itself to be outbidden. 
When is all this to end ? When is there to be a settlement ? There are no 
near prospects. They will not meet, except on preposterous conditions. Jinnah 
insists that Gandhi should admit that he is a Hindu. Gandhi insists that 
Jinnah should admit that he is one of the leaders of the Muslims. Never has 
there been such a deplorable state of bankruptcy of statesmanship as one 
sees in these two leaders of India. They are making long and interminable 
speeches, like lawyers whose trade it is to contest everything, concede 
nothing and talk by the hour. Suggest anything by way of solution for the 
deadlock to either of them, and it is met by an everlasting “Nay”. Neither 
will consider a solution of the problems which is not eternal. Between them 
Indian politics has become “frozen” to use a well-known Banking phrase and 
no political action is possible.
How does Ranade strike as compared to these two ? I have no personal 
impression to give. But reading what others have said I think I can say 
what he must have been like. He had not a tinge of egotism in him. His 
intellectual attainments could have justified any amount of pride, nay even 
insolence. But he was the most modest of men. Serious youths were captivated 
by his learning and geniality. Many, feeling completely under his sway, 
responded to his ennobling influence and moulded their whole lives with 
the passionate reverence for their adored master. He refused to be satisfied 
with the praises of fools, and was never afraid of moving in the company of 
equals and of the give and take it involves, He never claimed to be a mystic 
relying on the inner voice. He was a rationalist prepared to have his views 
tested in the light of reason and experience. His greatness was natural. He 
needed no aid of the stage nor the technique of an assumed eccentricity nor 
the means of a subsidized press. As I said, Ranade was principally a social 
reformer. He was not a politician in the sense of one who trades in politics. 
But he has played an important part in the political advancement of India. 
To some of the politicians he acted as the teacher who secured such signal 
successes and who dazzled their critics by their brilliance. To some he acted 
as the guide, but to all he acted as the philosopher.
