134
 
DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES
a linguistic State. Unfortunately no student has devoted himself to a 
demographic survey of the population of India. We only know from our census 
reports how many are Hindus, how many are Muslims, how many Jews, 
how many Christians and how many untouchables. Except for the knowledge 
we get as to how many religions there are this information is of no value. 
What we want to know is the distribution of castes in different linguistic 
areas. On this we have very little information. One has to depend on one’s 
own knowledge and information. I don’t think it would be contradicted if 
it is said that the caste set-up within the linguistic area is generally such 
that it contains one or two major castes large in number and a few minor 
castes living in subordinate dependence on the major castes.
Communal Set-up
Let me give a few illustrations. Take the Punjab of PEPSU. The Jats 
dominate the whole area. The untouchables live in subordinate dependence 
on them. Take Andhra—there are two or three major communities spread 
over the linguistic area. They are either the Reddis or the Kammas and 
the Kappus. They hold all the land, all the offices, all the business. The 
untouchables live in subordinate dependence on them. Take Maharashtra. 
The Marathas are a huge majority in every village in Maharashtra. The 
Brahmins, the Gujars, the Kolis and the untouchables live in subordinate 
co-operation. There was a time when the Brahmins and the banias lived 
without fear. But times have changed. After the murder of Mr. Gandhi, the 
Brahmins and the banias got such a hiding from the Marathas that they have 
run away to the towns as safety centres. Only the wretched untouchables, 
the Kolis and the Malis have remained in the villages to bear the tyranny 
of the Maratha communal majority. Anyone who forgets this communal set-
up will do so at his peril.
In a linguistic State what would remain for the smaller communities to 
look to ? Can they hope to be elected to the Legislature ? Can they hope to 
maintain a place in the State service ? Can they expect any attention to their 
economic betterment ? In these circumstances, the creation of a linguistic 
State means the handing over of Swaraj to a communal majority. What an 
end to Mr. Gandhi’s Swaraj ! Those who cannot understand this aspect of 
the problem would understand it better if instead of speaking in terms of 
linguistic State we spoke of a Jat State, a Reddy State or a Maratha State.
Third Issue
The third problem which calls for consideration is whether the creation 
of linguistic States should take the form of consolidation of the people 
speaking one language into one State. Should all Maharashtrians be collected 
together into one Maharashtra State ? Should all Andhra area be put into 
one Andhra State ? This question of consolidation does not merely relate 
to new units. It relates also to the existing linguistic provinces such as
