464
 
DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES
the consolidated holding. Prof. Jevons makes no provision to conserve the 
results of consolidation. Mr. Keatinge does not deal with consolidation at 
all. He is concerned only with the prevention of further fragmentation. 
But fragmentation, there will be in a holding even after it is entered as 
an economic holding. By his measure he will only succeed in preserving 
the holdings as they will be found at the time of registration, i.e., he will 
not allow them to be reduced in size. But they will be small and scattered 
all the same. Mr. Keatinge, notwithstanding his legislation, leaves the 
situation more or less as it exists. Real consolidation is, however, aimed at 
by Prof. Jevons and the Baroda Committee. The principles they advocate 
for the purpose are almost the same ; and so are their procedures for 
carrying it out.
As for the preservation of consolidated holdings Mr. Keatinge as well 
as the Baroda Committee establish the one-man rule of succession. The 
Baroda Committee would adopt this rule only when division of land would 
result in uneconomic holdings and then too would compel the successor 
to buy off the claims of the other dispossessed heirs. Mr. Keatinge would 
let the dispossessed heirs off without compensation.
A more serious criticism against these projects of consolidation consists 
in the fact they have failed to recognize that a consolidated holding must 
be an enlarged holding as well. If it is said that Indian agriculture suffers 
from small and scattered holdings we must not only consolidate, but also 
enlarge them. It must be borne in mind that consolidation may obviate 
the evils of scattered holdings, but it will not obviate the evils of small 
holdings unless the consolidated holding is an economic, i.e. an enlarged 
holding. The Committee as well as Mr. Keatinge have entirely lost sight 
of this aspect of the question. Prof. Jevons, alone of the advocates, keeps 
it constantly before his mind that consolidation must bring about in its 
train the enlargement of holdings.
IV
ENLARGEMENT
Granted that enlargement of holdings is as important as their 
consolidation we will now turn to the discussion of regulating their 
size. It is desired by all interested in our agriculture that our holdings 
should be economic holdings. We would have been more thankful to the 
inventors of this new, precise and scientific terminology had they given 
us a precise and scientific definition of an economic holding. On the 
other hand, it is believed that a large holding is somehow an economic 
holding. It may be said that even Prof. Jevons has fallen a victim to 
this notion. For when discussing what the size of a holding should 
be he dogmatically states that in the consolidated village the mode
