334
 
DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES
for entering into this subject at such great length. I realize that no Constitution 
is a perfect constitution. Imperfections there are bound to be. But I think a 
distinction must be drawn between imperfections and inherent and congenital 
deficiencies. Imperfections can be removed. But congenital deficiencies cannot 
be supplied. The demands made in the resolutions of the Congress or of 
the Liberal Federation, even if granted, will remove the imperfections. But 
will they remove the deficiencies ? I would not mind the imperfections if I 
was assured that there are no deficiencies. The greatest deficiency in the 
Constitution is that it will not lead to Dominion Status. Neither the Congress 
nor the Liberal Federation seems to be aware that this deficiency exists. Their 
demands have no relation to the goal of India’s political evolution. They do 
not even mention it. It is surprising that Congressmen should have become 
so enamoured of the prospect of seizing political power that their demands 
against the British Government should not even contain a declaration from 
the British Government in this behalf. But if Congress forget, the people 
of India cannot and should not. To do so would be fatal. It would be fatal 
as much for an individual as for a people to forget that a stage on the way 
is not the home and to follow the way without knowing whether it leads 
homewards or not is to misdirect one-self and fall into a ditch.
You must not misunderstand me. I am not an impatient idealist. I am 
not condemning the gradualist, who is prepared to wait and take thing by 
instalments, although the gradualist, who has a valid claim for a rupee, 
demands an anna and proclaims a great victory when he gets a pie, must 
become an object of pity. All I want is that if circumstances force us to be 
gradualists we must not fail to be realists. Before accepting an instalment 
we should examine it carefully and satisfy ourselves that it contains an 
acknowledgement of the whole claim. Otherwise, as often happens what is 
good for the moment turns out to be the enemy of the better.
Some of you will ask, how can India secure Dominion Status. My answer 
is India will get Dominion Status only if the Princes who join the Federation, 
consent to its being granted. If the Princes object to the grant of Dominion 
Status to India, then India cannot get Dominion Status. The Federation 
places the strings of India’s political evolution in the hands of the Princes. 
The destiny of India will be controlled by the Princes.
This view of the future will strike as very strange to a great many of 
you. We are all saturated with Dicey’s dictum regarding the Sovereignty 
of Parliament. We all have learned from him that Parliament is supreme, 
that it is so supreme that it can do anything except make man a woman 
and woman a man. It would not be unnatural if some of you ask how can 
the Princes stand in the way when the British Parliament is supreme. It 
will take some effort on your part to accept the proposition that the British 
Parliament has no supremacy over the Indian Federation. Its authority to 
change the Federal Constitution now embodied in the government of India 
Act is strictly limited.
