311
 
FEDERATION VERSUS FREEDOM
made to define the status of a person in a Federal State, therefore, not 
one question, but several must be answered : What is the relation of this 
person to the Federal State, as against any and all foreign States ? What 
is the relation of this person to the State in which he resides ? Further is 
it possible to be a citizen of one State and not a citizen of Federal State ?
Such questions did not arise in Canada and Australia when they became 
federations. The reason was that persons residing in their respective units 
were natural born British subjects—a status which remained with them when 
the Federation came. After the Federation the powers of naturalization was 
given to the Federation and consequently every one who is naturalized by 
the Federation is a citizen of the Federation and therefore of every unit in it.
Such questions however did arise in the U.S.A., Switzerland and Germany, 
because before the Federation their units were all foreign States and their 
subjects were foreign subjects. But it is noteworthy that in all these cases a 
common citizenship was established as a part of the federation. A rule was 
established whereby it was accepted that a citizenship of one unit carried 
with it a citizenship of the Federation.
The case of the Indian Federation is similar to that of the U.S.A., Germany 
and Switzerland. The subject of an Indian State is a foreigner in British 
India as well as in another Indian State. The subject of a British Indian 
Province is a foreigner in every Indian State.
What does the Indian Federation do with regard to this matter ? Does 
it forge a common Citizenship for all Units which become members of the 
Federation ? The answer is no. A British Indian will continue to be a foreigner 
in every Indian State even though it is a Federal State after the Federation, 
as he was before the Federation. Similarly a subject of a Federated Indian 
State will be a foreigner in every British Indian Province after the Federation 
as he was before Federation. There is no common nationality. The whole 
principle of the Federation is that the ruler of a Federated State shall remain 
the ruler of the State and his subjects shall remain his subjects and the 
Crown as the ruler of the Federated Provinces shall remain the ruler of the 
Provinces and his subjects shall remain his subjects.
This difference in citizenship manifests itself in two specific ways.
Firstly, it manifests itself in the matter of right to serve. Federation being 
established under the Crown, only persons who are subjects of the Crown are 
entitled to serve under it. This is recognized by Section 262. This of course 
is an injustice to the subjects of the States. To prevent this injustice which 
of course is a logical consequence of difference of citizenship, power is given 
to the Secretary of State to declare the subjects of the Indian States eligible 
for service under the Federation. This is an anomalous state of affairs and 
although the injustice to Indian State subjects is mitigated, the injustice
