248
 
DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES
of our Indian cosmos is its division into two mighty political communities as 
distant from each other as the poles apart—On the one hand the Hindus—with 
their elaborate caste distinctions—on the other hand, the Mohammedans—with 
their social equality. To these must be added a host of minor nationalities 
most of them numbering millions—almost as widely differentiated from one 
another by ethnological or political distinctions as are the Hindus from the 
Mohammedans, such as Sikhs, with their warlike habits and traditions and 
their enthusiastic religious beliefs, the Rohillas, the Pathans, the Assamese, 
the Baluchis and other wild and martial tribes on our frontiers, the hillmen 
dwelling in the folds of the Himalayas, our subjects in Burma, Mongol in 
race and Buddhist in religion, the Gonds, Mhars, Bheels and other non-
Aryan people in the centre and south of India, and the enterprising Parsees, 
with their rapidly developing manufactures and commercial interests. Again, 
amongst these numerous communities may be found, at one and the same 
moment, all the various stages of civilization through which mankind has 
passed from the pre-historic ages to the present days.”
3. Englishmen have all along insisted that India is unfit for 
representative Government because of the division of her population into 
castes and creeds. This does not carry conviction with the advanced wing 
of Indian politicians. When they say that there are also social divisions 
in Europe as there are in India they are amply supported by facts. The 
social divisions of India are equalled, if not outdone, in a country like 
the United States of America. Corresponding to those in the former, we 
have in the latter men bonded together in a criminal conspiracy and trust 
or combinations that prey upon the public. Not only are there political 
sub-divisions but also industrial, scientific, and religious associations, 
differing in their aims and their attitudes towards each other. Apart 
from political parties with diverse ends, social sets, cliques and gangs 
we find in the United States of America more permanent divisions of the 
population such as the Poles, Dutch, Swedes, Germans, Russians, etc., 
each with its own language, religious and moral codes and traditions. If 
social divisions unfit a country for representative Government, it should 
unfit the United States of America as much as India. But if with all the 
social divisions, the United States of America is fit for representative 
Government, why not India ? Ask the Indian politicians, so entrenched, 
it is difficult to dislodge them, and show that the social divisions of India 
are of a different kind or grant them their contention. Without these two 
there is no third alternative possible.
4. In my opinion their contention cannot be granted for the social 
divisions of India do matter in politics. How they matter can be best shown 
by understanding when they don’t matter. Men live in a community by 
virtue of the things they have in common. What they must have in common 
in order to form a community are aims, beliefs, aspirations, knowledge,
