474
 
DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES
Such high pressure of population on land is probably unknown in any 
other part of the world. The effect of it is, of course, obvious.
Notwithstanding what others have said, this enormous pressure is the 
chief cause of the subdivision of land. It is the failure to grasp the working 
of this pressure on land that makes the law of inheritance such a great 
grievance. To say that the law of inheritance causes sub-division of land is 
to give a false view by inverting the real situation. The mere existence of 
the law cannot be complained of as a grievance. The grievance consists in 
the fact that it is invoked. But why is it invoked even when it is injurious ? 
Simply because it is profitable. There is nothing strange in this. When 
farming is the only occupation, to get a small piece of land is better than 
to have none. Thus the grievance lies in the circumstances which put a 
premium on these small pieces of land. The premium, is no doubt, due to 
the large population depending solely on agriculture to eke out its living. 
Naturally a population that has little else to prefer to agriculture will try to 
invoke every possible cause to get a piece of land however small. It is not 
therefore the law of inheritance that is the evil, but it is the high pressure 
on land which brings it into operation. People cultivate the small (piece not 
because their standard of living is low as Prof. Jevons seems to think25 but 
because it is the only profitable thing for them to do at present. If they had 
something more profitable to do they would never prefer the small piece. It 
is therefore easy to understand how the universal prevalance of the small 
farms or petit culture is due to this enormous pressure on land.
In spite of the vehement struggle that our agricultural population 
maintains in trying to engage itself productively as cultivators of a farm 
however small, it is true that judged by the standard of Sir James Caird 
a large portion of it is bound to remain idle. Idle labour and idle capital 
differ in a very important particular. Capital exists, but labour lives. That 
is to say capital when idle does not earn, but does not also consume much 
to keep itself. But labour, earning or not consumes in order to live. Idle
25. Opt. cit. Introduction. The Impression that Prof. Jevons leaves on his readers is that 
agriculture suffers in India because of the low standard of living. That a higher standard of 
life once established will necessitate a large holding because people with a high standard of life 
will prefer to migrate rather than accept a small holding. As his argument that holdings and 
standard of life are related is likely to mislead his less thoughtful readers, a word of comment 
is necessary. A standard of living is merely a level of consumption fixed in habit. But what 
determines the depth of a particular level of consumption? Undoubtedly the level of production. 
We may grant the truth of the statement that a rise in the standard of living works as a 
stimulus to higher production but it is foolish to expect mere wish to be father to the deed. It 
is actual production alone that can support rise in the standard and not wish, generated though 
it be either by “travel or education”. If Prof. Jevons means that an opportunity for increased 
production, leading to a higher standard of life, will disfavour small holdings we are one with 
him. But he can make himself more intelligible by dropping standard of living and only arguing 
for increased production; that increased production leads to a rise in standard will be granted by 
all; but the reverse cannot be maintained Prof. Jevons seems to do, for it may lead to production 
or predation. To speak of raising the standard of life without speaking of increased production 
is to give expression to a pious wish, if it does not lead to mischief.
