132
 
DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES
The duty of answering on behalf of the Government to the debate fell on me. 
Naturally I took the matter to the higher authorities in order to ascertain 
what exactly their point of view was. Strange as it may appear, it became 
clear to me that the High Command was totally opposed to the creation of 
linguistic provinces. In these circumstances, the solution that was found was 
that the responsibility to answer the debate had better be taken over by the 
Prime Minister. The Prime Minister in reply to the debate made statement 
promising the creation of an Andhra State immediately. On the basis of 
the statement made by the Prime Minister, the resolution was withdrawn. 
The matter rested there.
Second Time
As Chairman of the Drafting Committee, I had to deal with the matter a 
second time. When the draft Constitution was completed, I wrote a letter to 
the Prime Minister asking him whether I could include Andhra as a separate 
State in Part A States of the Constitution in view of what he had said in 
the course of the debate on the Resolution. I have nothing with me here 
to refresh my memory as to what exactly happened. But the President of 
the Constituent Assembly, Dr. Rajendra Prasad, appointed a Committee to 
investigate into the formation of linguistic States, under the Chairmanship 
of Mr. Dhar, a lawyer from U.P.
People will remember the Dhar Committee for one thing if not for any 
other. The Committee said that under no circumstances should Bombay City 
be included in Maharashtra if Maharashtra was made a linguistic State. 
That report was then considered by the Jaipur session of the Congress. 
The Jaipur Congress appointed a Three-Man Committee consisting of the 
Prime Minister, Mr. Vallabhbhai Patel and Dr. Pattabhi Sitaramayya. They 
produced a report, the gist of which was that an Andhra province should be 
created immediately but the city of Madras should remain with the Tamils. 
A committee was appointed to go into the details. It produced a more or less 
unanimous report. But the report was opposed by substantial elements among 
the Andhras including Mr. Prakasam who were not prepared to relinquish 
their claim to Madras, and the thing lay dormant there.
After that comes the incident of Shri Potti Sriramulu who had to sacrifice 
his life for the sake of an Andhra province. It is a sad commentary on the 
ruling party that Mr. Sriramulu should have had to die for a cause the 
validity of which was accepted by all Congressmen. The creation of a new 
Andhra province now being thought of is only a pindadan to the departed 
soul of Mr. Sriramulu by the Prime Minister. Whether such action on the 
part of the Government would have been tolerated in any other country is 
a matter on which there is no use speculating.
There are, in my opinion, three conditions which must be satisfied before 
a linguistic State is brought into being. The first condition is that it must 
be a viable State. This rule was accepted as absolute when the question of
