318
 
DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES
of United States. It has no potentiality of forging a nation out of these States 
and probably the framers of the Scheme have had no such intention at all.
2. Democratization of Autocracies
The other advantage of the Federal Scheme which is claimed by its 
protagonists is that it brings beneath the dome of a single political edifice the 
new democracies of British India and the ancient autocracies of the Indian 
States and that by bringing the two under one edifice it provides contact 
between democracy and autocracy and thus enables the democracy in British 
India to democratize the autocracies in the Indian States. To examine this 
argument and to see how much force there is behind it, it is well to note 
that the Indian States and the British Indian Provinces are geographically 
contiguous. There is regular intercourse between them. The people of British 
India and those of the Indian States racially, linguistically and culturally form 
parts of one whole. With all these contacts and with all the unity of race, 
religion, language and culture British India has not been able to influence 
at all the forms of government which are prevalent in the Indian States. On 
the contrary while British India has advanced from autocracy to democracy, 
the Indian States have remained what they were with their fixed form of 
government. Unless therefore there is something special in the Act itself 
which enables British India to exercise its influence on the Indian States 
through the legislature and through the executive, this argument can have 
no substance at all. Is there anything in the Act which gives British India 
power to influence the States ? In this connection reference may be made to 
section 34(1) which deals with the procedure in the legislature with respect 
to the discussion and voting of the Budget estimates.
From an examination of this Section it will be clear that the estimates 
relating to para (a) and para (f) of sub-section (3) of section 33 cannot even 
be discussed by the Federal legislature. Para (a) of sub-section (3) refers to 
the salary and allowances of the Governor-General and other expenditure 
relating to his office for which estimate is required to be made by Orders 
in Council, and para (f) relates to the sums payable to His Majesty under 
this Act out of the revenue of the Federation in respect of the expenses 
incurred in discharging the functions of the Crown in its relations with 
the Indian States. Another section which has a bearing upon this point is 
Section 38. Section 33 is a section which deals with the making of the rules 
by the Federal legislature for regulating its procedure in the conduct of its 
business. While this section permits the Federal legislature to make its own 
rules it allows the Governor-General to make rules —
 (c) or prohibiting the discussion of, or the asking of questions on, any 
matter connected with any Indian State, other than a matter with
