374
 
DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES
 (2) The relative majority of representation given to a majority community 
in the legislature should not be so large as to enable the majority 
to establish its rule with the help of the smallest minorities.
 (3) The distribution of seats should be so made that a combination of 
the majority and one of the major minorities should not give the 
combine such a majority as to make them impervious to the interest 
of the minorities.
 (4) The distribution should be so made that if all the minorities combine 
they could, without depending on the majority, form a government 
of their own.
 (5) The weightage taken from the majority should be distributed among 
the minorities in inverse proportion to their social standing, economic 
position and educational condition so that a minority which is large 
and which has a better social, educational and economic standing gets 
a lesser amount of weightage than a minority whose numbers are 
less and whose educational, economic and social position is inferior 
to that of the others.
If I may say so, the representation is a balanced representation. No 
one community is placed in a position to dominate others by reason of its 
numbers. The Muslim objection to the Hindu majority and the Hindu and 
Sikh objections to the Muslim majority are completely eliminated, both in 
the Central as well as in the Provinces.
VIII 
NATURE OF THE ELECTORATE
With regard to the question of electorates the following propositions 
should be accepted :
 (1) Joint electorate or separate electorate is a matter of machinery for 
achieving a given purpose. It is not a matter of principle.
 (2) The purpose is to enable a minority to select candidates to the 
Legislature who will be real and not nominal representatives of the 
minority.
 (3) While separate electorate gives an absolute guarantee to the minority, 
that its representatives will be no others except those who enjoy 
its confidence, a system of joint electorates which will give equal 
protection to the minorities should not be overlooked.
 (4) A Four-member constituency, with a right to the minorities to have 
a double vote and requiring a minimum percentage of minority votes, 
may be considered as a possible substitute.
