317
 
FEDERATION VERSUS FREEDOM
incompatible with a Federal form of Government. It must be borne in mind 
that as a nation may be found in being, so also a nation, may be brought into 
being. In a Federal Government there may be at the start no nation, it may 
be a collection of heterogeneous communities. But it is possible to have in 
the end a nation even under a Federal Government. The most striking case 
is that of the United States of America. Mr. Bryce relates a story which is 
both interesting as well as instructive. This is the story and I give it in his 
own words. “Some years ago the American Protestant Episcopal Church was 
occupied at its triennial Convention in revising its liturgy. It was thought 
desirable to introduce among the short sentence a prayer for the whole people; 
and an eminent New England Divine proposed the words, ‘O Lord, bless our 
nation’. Accepted one afternoon on the spur of the moment, the sentence 
was brought up next day for reconsideration, when so many objections were 
raised by the laity to the word ‘nation’, as importing too definite a recognition 
of national unity, that it was dropped, and instead there were adopted the 
words, ‘O Lord, bless these United States.’ Notwithstanding this prayer to 
the Lord, notwithstanding the reluctance to encourage the idea of a nation 
over against the idea of the states and notwithstanding the federal form oi 
Government the United States is a nation. That it is a nation in the social 
sense of the word is incontrovertible.”
How has this happened in the United States ? Can we hope to see this 
happen in India under the Federal Scheme ? Bryce explains how this 
happened in America. He points out that in America “The Central or National 
Government is not a mere league, for it does not wholly depend on the 
component Communities which we call the States. It is itself a Commonwealth 
as well as a Union of Commonwealths, because it claims directly the obedience 
of every citizen, and acts immediately upon him through its Courts and 
executive officers”. It can tax him, make law for him and judge him. In short 
it is the process of Government which is responsible largely if not wholly for 
moulding the Americans into a nation and that this was possible because 
in the Federal Form of Government of the United States there is a direct 
contact between the National Government and the individual.
Is this possible under the Indian Federal Scheme ? My answer is that 
such a thing is not possible. The people in the Indian States remain the 
subjects of the States. The Federal Government cannot deal with them 
directly. Everything has to be done through the State. There is no contact 
between the two, not even for purposes of taxation. How can a feeling 
that they belong to the national Government grow in the subject of the 
Indian States if they are excluded from any and every influence and are 
not even made to feel the existence of the National Government ? I am 
afraid this United States of India will not be more than a mere body
