313
 
FEDERATION VERSUS FREEDOM
cannot legally act against the Constitution, but of persons falsely assuming 
to act as such government, and is therefore ipso jure void. Those who disobey 
Federal authority on the ground of the commands of a State authority are 
therefore insurgents against the Union who must be coerced by its power. The 
coercion of such insurgents is directed not against the State but against them 
as individuals though combined wrongdoers. A State cannot secede and cannot 
rebel. Similarly, it cannot be coerced.”.
Can the Federal Government in India take the stand which the Union 
Government can when there is a conflict of allegiance ? There can be no 
doubt that it cannot, for the simple reason that the allegiance to the King 
saves the allegiance to the Ruler. This is a very unhappy if not a dangerous 
situation.
(5) Strength of the Federal Frame
The existence in the country of one Government which can speak and act 
in the name of and with the unified will of the whole nation is no doubt the 
strongest Government that can be had and only a strong Government can 
be depended upon to act in an emergency. The efficiency of a Governmental 
system must be very weak where there exists within a country a number of 
Governments which are distinct centres of force, which constitute separately 
organized political bodies into which different parts of the nation’s strength 
flows and whose resistance to the will of the Central Government is likely to 
be more effective than could be the resistance of individuals, because such 
bodies are each of them endowed with a government, a revenue, a militia, 
a local patriotism to unite them. The former is the case where the unitary 
system of Government prevails. The latter is the case where the Federal 
form of Government prevails.
The Indian Federation by reason of the fact that it is a Federation 
has all the weaknesses of a Federal form of Government. But the Indian 
Federation has its own added weaknesses which are not to be found in 
other Federations and which are likely to devitalize it altogether. Compare 
the Indian Federation with the Federation of the United States. As Bryce 
says, “the authority of the national Government over the citizens of every 
State is direct and immediate, not exerted through the State organization, 
and not requiring the co-operation of the State Government. For most 
purposes the National Government ignores the States, and it treats the 
citizens equally bound by its laws. The Federal Courts, Revenue Officers 
and Post Office draw no help from any State Officials, but depend directly 
on Washington ……………….. There is no local self-Government in Federal 
Matters ……………….. the Federal authority, be it executive or judicial, 
acts upon the citizens of a State directly by means of its own officers who 
are quite distinct from and independent of State Officials. Federal indirect 
taxes, for instance, are levied all along the coast and over the country by 
Federal custom-house collectors and excisemen acting under the orders
