353
 
FEDERATION VERSUS FREEDOM
and pointed without being dogmatic in order to make it alive to the dangers 
arising from the inauguration of the Federal Scheme. This is the task I 
had set before myself in preparing this address. Whether I have failed 
or succeeded, it is for you to say. If this address has length which is not 
compensated by depth, all I can say is that I have tried to do my duty 
according to my lights.
I am not opposed to a Federal Form of Government. I confess I have a 
partiality for a Unitary form of Government. I think India needs it. But I 
also realize that a Federal Form of Government is inevitable if there is to be 
Provincial Autonomy, But I am in dead horror the Federal Scheme contained 
in the Government of India Act. I think I have justified my antipathy by 
giving adequate reasons, I want all to examine them and come to their owe 
conclusions. Let us however realize that the case of Provincial Autonomy 
is very different from that of the Federal Scheme. To those who think that 
the Federation should become acceptable if the Governor-General gave an 
assurance along the same lines as was supposed to be done by the Governors 
that he will not exercise his powers under his special responsibilities I 
want to say two things. First I am sure the Governor-General cannot give 
such an assurance because he is exercising these powers not merely in 
the interest of the Crown but also in the interest of the States. Secondly, 
even if he did, that cannot alter the nature of the Federal Scheme. To 
those who think that a change in the system of State representation from 
nomination to election will make the Federation less objectionable, I want 
to say that they are treating a matter of detail as though it was a matter 
of fundamental. Let us note what is fundamental and what is not. Let there 
be no mistake, let there be no fooling as to this. We have had enough of 
both. The real question is the extension and the growth of responsibility. 
Is that possible ? That is the crux. Let us also realize that there is no use 
hugging to Provincial Autonomy and leaving responsibility in the Centre 
hanging in the air. I am convinced that without real responsibility at the 
Centre, Provincial Autonomy is an empty shell.
What we should do to force our point of view, this is no place to discuss. 
It is enough if I have succeeded in giving you an adequate idea of what are 
the dangers of this Federal Scheme.
zz
