239
 
RANADE, GANDHI AND JINNAH
public opinion. Indeed this is the chief function of a party. For this, a party 
must do two things. In the first place it must establish contact with the 
masses. It must go out among the masses with its wares—its principles, 
policies, ideas and candidates. In the second place it must carry on propaganda 
among the masses in favour of its wares. It must animate them and enlighten 
them, to quote Bryce again “Give the voters some knowledge of the political 
issues they have to decide, to inform them of their leaders, and the crimes 
of their opponents”. These are the basic factors from which concerted action 
can arise. A party which fails to forge concerted action has no right to call 
itself a party.
Which of these things the Liberal Party has done as an organization? The 
Liberal Party has only the High Command. It has no machine. Not having 
any machine the high command is only a shadow. Its following is confined 
to that second concentric ring consisting of persons who are bound by ties 
of tradition. The leaders have nothing to evoke emotional loyalty. They have 
no war-cry to gather a crowd. The Liberal Party does not believe in mass 
contact. It would be difficult to imagine a party so completely isolated and 
insulated from the main mass of people. It does not believe in conversion. 
Not that it has no Gospel to preach ; but like the Hindu religion it is a 
non-proselytising creed. It believes in the formulation of principles and 
policies. But it does not work for giving effect to them. Propaganda and 
concerted action are anathema to the Liberal Party. Individual voices and 
annual meetings and clamour for invitation when a Cripps arrives or when 
the Viceroy decides to invite important individuals have become the limits 
of its political activity.
Is there any wonder if the Liberal Party has fallen into disrepute ? The 
Liberal Party has forgotten the most elementary fact that organization is 
essential for the accomplishment of any purpose and particularly in politics 
where the harnessing of so many divergent elements in a working unity is 
so great.
Who is responsible for this collapse of the Liberal Party in India ? 
How ever much we may regret to have to say it, I think it will have to be 
admitted that the responsibility for this catastrophe does to some extent fall 
on Ranade. Ranade belonged to the Classes. He was born and bred among 
them. He never became a man of masses. The Liberal Party has no machine 
and the reason why it did not forge a machine is because it did not believe 
in mass contact. This aversion to mass contact is the legacy of Ranade. In 
avoiding mass contact the party is following the tradition left by Ranade. 
There is another legacy of Ranade to the Liberal Party and that relates to 
the false faith in the driving force of principles and policies. Mazzini once 
said : “You may kill men, you cannot kill a great idea.” To me it appears 
to be a most mistaken view. Men are mortal. So are ideas. It is wrong to 
hold that an idea will take roots pro prio-vigore. An idea needs propagation
