STATES AND MINORITIES
419
ARTICLE II—Section IV
PART I—CLAUSE I
There is nothing new in this clause. The right to representation in the 
Legislature is conceded by the Poona Pact. The only points that require to 
be reconsidered relate to (1) Quantum of Representation, (2) Weightage and 
(3) The System of Electorates.
(1) Quantum
The quantum of representation allowed to the Scheduled Castes by the 
Poona Pact is set out in Clause I of the Pact. The proportion set out in 
the Pact was fixed out of the balance of seats which remained after (i) the 
share of the other communities had been taken out; (ii) after weightage to 
other communities had been allotted, and (iii) after seats had been allocated 
to special interests. This allotment of seats to the Scheduled Castes has 
resulted in great injustice. The loss due to seats taken out as weightage 
and seats given to special interests ought not to have been thrown upon 
the Scheduled Castes. The allotment of those seats had already been made 
by the Communal Award long before the Poona Pact. It was therefore not 
possible then to rectify this injustice.
(2) Weightage
There is another injustice from which the Scheduled Castes have been 
suffering. It relates to their right to a share in weightage.
As one can see the right to weightage has become a matter of double 
controversy. One controversy is between the majority and the minorities, 
the other is a matter of controversy between the different minorities.
The first controversy relates to the principle of weightage. The majority 
insists that the minority has no right to representation in excess of the ratio 
of its population to the total population. Why this rule is insisted upon by 
the majority it is difficult to understand. Is it because the majority wants 
to establish its own claim to population ratio so that it may always remain 
as a majority and act as a majority ? Or is it because of the fact that a 
minority no matter how much weightage was given to it must remain a 
minority and cannot alter the fact that the majority will always be able 
to impose its will upon it. The first ground leads to a complete negation 
of the basic conception of majority rule which if rightly understood means 
nothing more than a decision of the majority to which the minority has 
reconciled itself. This cannot be the intention of the majority. One must 
put a more charitable construction and assume that the argument on which 
the contention of the majority rests is the second and not the first. That 
a minority even with weightage will remain a minority has to be accepted 
in view of the insistence of a Communal Majority to remain a majority
