STATES AND MINORITIES
427
for each new House of Commons; and it has long been a custom that when 
one political party continues in power for two or three parliaments, if the 
speaker in one parliament is of British extraction the next one shall be a 
French-Canadian.
“It is a rule also that the offices of speaker and of deputy speaker can 
at no time be held by men of the same race. If the speaker is a French-
Canadian, the deputy speaker, who is also Chairman of committees, must 
be an English-speaking Canadian ; for the rule of the House is that the 
member elected to serve as deputy speaker shall be required to possess 
the full and practical knowledge of the language which is not that of the 
speaker for the time being.
The clerkship and the assistant clerkship of the House, and the offices of 
sergeant-at-arms and deputy sergeant-at-arms—all appointive as distinct from 
elective offices—are, by usage, also similarly divided between the two races.
Nearly all the offices, important and unimportant, connected with 
parliament, with the Senate as well as with the House, are distributed in 
accordance with these rules or usages. A roll call of the staffs of the two 
Houses, including even the boys in knicker-bockers who act as pages, would 
contain the names of almost as many French-Canadians as Canadians of 
British ancestry.
The rules and usages by virtue of which this distribution of offices is 
made are older than Confederation. They date back to the early years of 
the United Provinces, when Quebec and Ontario elected exactly the same 
number of members to the Legislature, and when these were the only 
provinces in the union.
Quebec today elects only 65 of the 234 members of the House of Commons. 
Its population is not one-fourth of the population of the Dominion. Its 
contribution to Dominion revenues does not exceed one-sixth. But an equal 
division of the offices of the House of Commons is regarded by Quebec as 
necessary to the preservation of its rights and privileges ; and so long as each 
political party, when it is in power, is dependent on support from French-
Canada, it will be nearly as difficult to ignore the claim of Quebec to these 
parliamentary honours and offices as it would be to repeal the clause in the 
British North America Act that safeguards the separate schools system.”.
Unfortunately for the minorities in India, Indian Nationalism has 
developed a new doctrine which may be called the Divine Right of the 
Majority to rule the minorities according to the wishes of the majority. Any 
claim for the sharing of power by the minority is called communalism while 
the monopolizing of the whole power by the majority is called Nationalism. 
Guided by such a political philosophy the majority is not prepared to
