STATES AND MINORITIES
415
adverse vote in the Legislature, India may suffer from instability of the 
Executive. For it is the easiest thing for groups to align and realign themselves 
at frequent intervals and for petty purposes and bring about the downfall 
of Government. The present solidarity of what are called the Major Parties 
cannot be expected to continue. Indeed as soon as the Problem of the British 
in India is solved the cement that holds these parties together will fall away. 
Constant overthrow of Government is nothing short of anarchy. The present 
Constitution has in it Section 93 which provides a remedy against it. But 
Section 93 would be out of place in the Constitution of a free India, Some 
substitute must therefore be found for Section 93.
Taking all these considerations together there is no doubt that the British 
type of the Executive is entirely unsuited to India.
The form of the Executive proposed in the clause is intended to serve 
the following purposes :
 (i) To prevent the majority from forming a Government without giving 
any opportunity to the minorities to have a say in the matter.
 (ii) To prevent the majority from having exclusive control over 
administration and thereby make the tyranny of the minority by 
the majority possible.
 (iii) To prevent the inclusion by the Majority Party in the Executive 
representatives of the minorities who have no confidence of the 
minorities.
 (iv) To provide a stable Executive necessary for good and efficient 
administration.
The clause takes the American form of Executive as a model and adapts it 
to Indian conditions especially to the requirements of minorities. The form of 
the Executive suggested in the proposal cannot be objected to on the ground 
that it is against the principle of responsible government. Indians who are 
used to the English form of Executive forget that this is not the only form of 
democratic and responsible Government. The American form of Executive is an 
equally good type of democratic and responsible form of Government. There is 
also nothing objectionable in the proposal that a person should not be qualified 
to become a Minister merely because he is elected to the Legislature. The 
principle that a member of the Legislature before he is made a Minister should 
be chosen by his constituents was fully recognized by the British Constitution 
for over hundred years. A member of Parliament who was appointed a 
Minister had to submit himself for election before taking up his appointment. 
It was only lately given up. There ought therefore to be no objection to 
it on the ground that the proposals are not compatible with responsible 
Governments. The actual proposal is an improved edition of the American 
form of Government, for the reason that under it members of the Executive 
can sit in the Legislature and have a right to speak and answer questions.
