293
 
FEDERATION VERSUS FREEDOM
that an appeal under this section shall be by way of a special case to be 
stated for the opinion of the Federal Court by a High Court, and the Federal 
Court may require a case to be so stated.
Two further points with regard to the Federal Judiciary may be noted. 
The first is the power of the Federal Court to execute its own orders. The 
Federal Court has no machinery of its own to enforce its orders. Section 
210 provides that the orders of the Federal Court shall be enforceable by 
all courts and authorities in every part of British India or of any Federated 
State as if they were orders duly made by the highest court exercising civil 
or criminal jurisdiction as the case may be in that part. The instrumentality, 
therefore, which the Federal Court can use for the enforcement of its own 
orders consists of the administrative machinery of the units of the Federation. 
The units of the Federation are bound to act in aid of the Federal Court. This 
is different to what prevails for instance, in the United States of America, 
where the Supreme Court has its own machinery for enforcing its own orders. 
The second point to note with regard to the Federal Court is the question 
of the powers of the Executive to remove the judges and the power of the 
Legislature to discuss their conduct. In this respect also the Federal Court 
stands on a different footing from the Federal Courts in other Federations. 
The Constitution does not give the Governor-General the power to suspend 
a Judge of the Federal Court. It forbids any discussion of a judge’s judicial 
conduct by the Legislature. This, no doubt, gives the judge of the Federal 
Court the greatest fixity of tenure and immunity from interference by the 
Executive or by the Legislature. To remove the Judiciary from the control of 
the Executive it has been found necessary that the tenure of a judge must 
not be subject to the pleasure of the Executive. All constitutions, therefore, 
provide that the tenure of a judge shall be during good behaviour and that 
a judge shall be removeable only if address is presented by the Legislature 
pronouncing that he is not of good behaviour. Some such authority must be 
vested in somebody which should have the power to pronounce upon the good 
behaviour of a judge. This provision is absent in the Federal Constitution, 
so that a Judge of the Federal Court once appointed is irremoveable from 
his place till retirement, no matter what his conduct during that period 
may be. Instead of this, power is given to His Majesty under section 
200(2)(b) to remove a Judge of the Federal Court on the ground of 
misbehaviour or infirmity of body or mind if the Judicial Committee of the 
Privy Council reports that he may be removed on any such ground.
IV
POWERS OF THE FEDERATION
Before I describe the powers of the Federal Government it might be 
desirable to explain what is the essence of a Federal Form of Government,
