342
 
DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES
I have already drawn your attention to some of the deformities of the 
Federal Scheme. What I have now drawn attention to is more than a 
deformity. It is a fatality of the Federation. So far as the States’ people are 
concerned, it is a decree of fate. It is something which they will never be 
able to escape once it is executed.
The State’s problem is one which, I believe could be solved by the Paramount 
Power along the lines I have suggested or along any other line consistently 
with the welfare of the people, if it wishes to do so. Paramountcy is like 
the Trimurti of Hindu Theology. It is Brahma because it has created the 
States. It is Vishnu because it preserves them. It is Shiva because it can 
destroy them. Paramountcy has played all these parts in different times in 
relation to the States. At one time, it played the part of Shiva. It has now 
been playing the part of Vishnu. To play the part of Vishnu with regard to 
the States is from the point of view of the good of the people the crudest 
act. Should British India be a party to it ? It is for you to consider.
IX
FEDERATION WITHOUT THE STATES
There is another point of view from which the case for Federation is 
argued. I must now proceed to examine that argument.
It is argued that the constitution creates Autonomous Provinces. The 
Autonomy of the Provinces means independence and therefore disruption of 
the Unity of British India. This must be counteracted. Some binding force 
must be provided so that the Provinces may be held together and unity 
and uniformity built up for the last hundred years as a result of British 
administration is preserved intact in fundamentals if not in details.
The argument is quite sound, if it only means that the creation of 
Autonomous Provinces makes the creation of a Central Government a 
necessity. This proposition I am sure will command universal assent. In 
all the Round Table Conferences the late Sir Mahomad Iqbal was the only 
delegate who was against the establishment of a Central Government. 
Every other delegate irrespective of caste or creed differed from him. They 
asserted that with the creation of Autonomous Provinces the establishment 
of a Central Government was a categorial imperative and that without it 
autonomy would result in anarchy.
But the argument goes beyond its legitimate scope. It seeks to justify the 
establishment of a Central Government for All India. The argument which 
can justify the establishment of a Central Government for British India 
is used to justify a Central Government for the whole of India. And the 
question that you have to consider is whether the creation of Autonomous 
Provinces in British India can justify a Central Government for the whole
