232
 
DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES
have serious results. It matters little what other gifts a people may possess 
if they are wanting in these which, from this point of view, are of most 
importance. If, for example, they have no capacity for grading their loyalties 
as well as for being moved by them ; If they have no natural inclination 
to liberty and no natural respect for law ; If they lack good humour and 
tolerate foul play ; If they know not how to compromise or when ; If they have 
not that distrust of extreme conclusions which is sometimes misdescribed 
as want of logic ; If corruption does not repel them ; and if their divisions 
tend to be either too numerous or too profound, the successful working of 
British Institutions may be difficult or impossible. It may indeed be least 
possible where the arts of Parliamentary persuasion and the dexterities of 
party management are brought to their highest perfection.”
Morley has observed :
“To hurry on after logical perfection is to show one’s self-ignorant of the 
material of that social structure with which the politician has to deal. To 
disdain anything short of an organic change in thought or institution is 
infatuation. To be willing to make such changes too frequently, even when 
they are possible, is fool-hardiness. That fatal French saying about small 
reforms being the worst enemies of great reforms, is, in the sense in which 
it is commonly used, a formula of social ruin.”
These are the principles on which success in Politics depends. Are they 
different from those which Ranade enunciated ? It bespeaks greatness 
in Ranade that he should have propounded them years before Bismark, 
Balfour and Morley.
The generation which Ranade served was wise in taking him as its 
political guide, friend and philosopher. His greatness lies in the fact that 
he can be a guide, friend and philosopher to this present, nay even to 
future generations.
There is one charge against Ranade which is frequently made and 
which I think must be met. It is said of Ranade that he believed that 
the conquest of India by the British was Providential, that it was in the 
best interest of India, that she should remain within the British Empire 
and that therein lay her final destiny. In short Ranade is accused of 
being opposed to India’s Independence.
The charge is founded on the following utterances of Ranade :
“It cannot be easily assumed that in God’s Providence, such vast 
multitudes as those who inhabit India were placed centuries together under 
influences and restraints of alien domination, unless such influences and 
restraints were calculated to do lasting service in the building up of the 
strength and character of the people in directions in which the Indian races
