284
 
DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES
I have set to myself a very limited task. It is to examine the scheme 
in the light of certain accepted tests and to place before you the results 
of this examination so that you may be in a position to form your own 
judgment regarding the merits of the scheme. It is true that I cannot 
altogether avoid setting out the outlines of the scheme. In fact, I am 
going to give an outline of the scheme. I realize that it is an essential 
preliminary without which my criticism might remain high up in the air. 
But the outline I am going to draw for my purpose will be the briefest 
and just enough to enable you to follow what I shall be saying regarding 
the merits of the scheme.
II
BIRTH AND GROWTH OF INDIAN FEDERATION
There are five countries which are known in modern times to 
have adopted the federal form of Government. They are : (1) U.S.A., 
(2) Switzerland, (3) Imperial Germany, (4) Canada and (5) Australia. 
To these five it is now proposed to add the sixth which is the All-India 
Federation.
What are the constituent units of this Federation ? For an answer to 
this question refer to section 5. It says:
“5. (1) It shall be lawful for His Majesty, if an address in that behalf has 
been presented to him by each House of Parliament and if 
the condition hereinafter mentioned is satisfied, to declare 
by Proclamation that as from the day therein appointed 
there shall be united in a Federation under the Crown, by 
the name of the Federation of India,—
 (a) The Provinces hereinafter called Governors’ Provinces ; and
 (b) the Indian States which have acceded or may thereafter accede to 
the Federation ; and in the Federation so established there shall 
be included the Provinces hereinafter called Chief Commissioners’ 
Provinces.
(2) The condition referred to is that, States—
 (a) the Rulers whereof will, in accordance with the provision contained 
in Part II of the First Schedule to this Act be entitled to choose 
not less than fifty-two members of the Council of State ; and
 (b) the aggregate population whereof, as ascertained in accordance 
with the said provisions, amounts to at least one-half of the 
total population of States, as so ascertained, have acceded to the 
Federation.”
Leaving aside the conditions prescribed by this Section for the 
inauguration of the Federation it is clear that the Units of the Federation 
are (1) The Governors’ Provinces, (2) Chief Commissioners’ Provinces and 
(3) The Indian States.
Proclamation 
of Federation 
of India
