168
 
DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES
The effects may be summarized as follows :
 (1) Voting is always communal. The voter votes for the candidate of his 
community and not for the best candidate.
 (2) The majority community carries the seat by sheer communal majority.
 (3) The minority community is forced to vote for the candidate of the 
majority community.
 (4) The votes of the minority community are not enough to enable 
the candidate to win the seat against the candidate put up by the 
majority community.
 (5) As consequence of social system of graded inequality the voter of the 
higher (major) communities can never condescend to give his vote to 
a candidate of a minority community. On the other hand the voter of 
the minority community who is socially on a lower level takes pride 
in giving his vote to the candidate of the majority community. That 
is another reason why a candidate of a minority community loses 
in election.
The Congress always wins, so it is found. But no one asks why does 
the Congress win ? The answer is that Congress is very popular. But why 
is the Congress popular ? The true answer is that Congress always puts 
up candidates which belong to castes which are in the majority in the 
constituencies. Caste and Congress are closely linked. It is by exploiting the 
caste system that the Congress wins.
These evil consequences of the caste system are sure to be sharpened 
by creation of Linguistic States. Minority communities may be crushed. If 
not crushed they may be tyrannized and oppressed. They are sure to be 
discriminated against and denied equality before law and equal opportunity 
in public life.
The history of nations and the changes in their idealogies have been well 
traced by Lord Action :
“In the old European system, the rights of nationalities were neither recognized 
by governments nor asserted by the people. The interest of the reigning families, 
not those of the nations, regulated the frontiers, and the administration was 
conducted generally without any reference to popular desires. Where all liberties 
were suppressed, the claims of national independence were necessarily ignored, 
and a princess, in the words of Fenelon, carried a monarchy in her wedding 
portion.”
Nationalities were at first listless. When they became conscious :
“They first rose against their conquerors in defence of their legitimate 
rulers. They refused to be governed by usurpers. Next came a time when 
they revolted because of the wrongs inflicted upon them by their rulers. 
The insurrections were provoked by particular grievances justified by 
definite complaints. Then came the French Revolution which effected
