376
 
DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES
X
PAKISTAN IN THE LIGHT OF PROPOSALS
My proposals are for an United India. They are made in the hope that the 
Muslims will accept them in preference to Pakistan as providing better security 
than Pakistan does. I am not against Pakistan, I believe it is founded on principle 
of self-determination, which it is now too late to question. I am prepared to 
give them the benefit of the principle, on condition that the Muslims do not 
deny the benefit of the principles to the Non-Muslim residents of the Area. 
But I believe, I am entitled to draw the attention of the Muslims to another 
and a better plan of security. I claim that my plan is better than the plan of 
Pakistan. Let me state the points which tell in favour of my plan. They are :
 (i) Under my proposal the danger of a communal majority, which is the 
basis of Pakistan is removed, 
 (ii) Under my proposal the weightage at present enjoyed by the Muslims 
is not disturbed.
 (iii) The position of Muslims in the Non-Pakistan Provinces is greatly 
strengthened by an increase in their representation, which they may 
not get if Pakistan comes and which will leave them in a more helpless 
condition than they are in at present.
XI 
A WORD TO HINDUS
Much of the difficulty over the Communal Question is due to the insistance 
of the Hindus that the rule of majority is sacrosanct and that it must be 
maintained at all costs. The Hindu does not seem to be aware of the fact that 
there is another rule, which is also operative in fields where important disputes 
between individual and nations arise and that rule is a rule of unanimity. If he 
will take the trouble to examine the position he will realise that such a rule is 
not a fiction, but it does exist. Let him take the Jury System. In the jury trial 
the principle is unanimity. The decision is binding upon the judge only if the 
verdict of the jury is unanimous. Let him take another illustration that of the 
League of Nations. What was the rule for decisions in the League of Nations ? 
The rule was a rule of unanimity. It is obvious that if the principle of unanimity 
was accepted by the Hindus as a rule of decision in the Legislature and in 
the Executive there would be no such thing as a Communal Problem in India.
One may well ask the Hindu that if he is not prepared to concede constitutional 
safeguards to the minorities, is he prepared to agree to the rule of unanimity ? 
Unfortunately he is not prepared to accept either.
About the rule of majority the Hindu is not prepared to admit any 
limitations. The majority he wants is an absolute majority. He will not be 
satisfied with relative majority. He should consider whether his insistance 
on absolute majority is fair proposition, which political philosophers can 
accept. He is not aware that even the constitution of the United States does
