364
 
DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES
 (ii) Taking 11 as the quota, the Hindus will have 217, the Muslims 44 
and the Europeans 35 votes to spare, while the Scheduled Castes 
will be short by 69, the Indian Christians by 56 and the Sikhs by 
52 votes. 
To put the same thing in a different way :
 (i) The Hindus with their excess of 217 votes can elect 20 non-Hindus, 
who would be dependent upon them ; the Muslims with their excess 
of 44 votes can elect 4 non-Muslims, who would be dependent upon 
them and the Europeans with their excess of 35 votes would be able 
to elect 3 non-Europeans, who would be dependent upon them.
 (ii) The Scheduled Castes with a shortage of 69 votes will be able 
to elect only 13 members on the stock of their own votes and for 
7 seats they will have to depend upon Hindu, Muslim or European 
voters. The Indian Christians with a shortage of 56 votes will be 
able to elect only 2 seats on the stock of their own voters. For the 
rest of the 5 seats they will have to depend upon Hindu, Muslim or 
European voters. Similarly the Sikhs with a shortage of 52 will be 
able to elect only 3 seats on the stock of their own voters. For the 
rest of the 5 seats they will have to depend upon Hindu, Muslim 
or European voters
Such is the position. It is evident that the excess representation granted 
to the smaller minorities is only an eye-wash. Their representation is made 
so dependent that in no sense can it be called a real representation.
Let me now take the second question. Is the rule of decision adopted 
by the Sapru Committee for the Constituent Assembly a safe rule ? The 
Cripps proposal had adopted the rule of bare majority. This was an absurd 
proposition which no sensible man could have proposed. I know of no case 
where questions relating to the constitution were left to be decided by a 
simple majority.
The Cripps proposals sought to excuse the adoption of the majority rule 
on the ground that there was to be a further provision for safeguarding 
the interest of the minorities. The provision was to take the form of a 
Treaty between the British Crown and the Indian Constituent Assembly, 
before Parliament was to relinquish its sovereignty and make India free. 
The proposal of a Treaty would have had some sense, if the Treaty was 
to override the constitution. But the proposal was impossible as under the 
Cripps scheme India was free to become a Dominion or an Independent 
country as she pleased. For once India became a Dominion it would ipso 
facto acquire all the legal power necessary to pass an enactment declaring 
that the Treaty shall not override the constitution. In that case the 
Treaty would have been no better than a calendar which members of the 
minorities might, if they wished, hang on the walls of their houses. This
