368
 
DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES
B. REPRESENTATION IN THE EXECUTIVE
This question raises three points :
 (i) The quantum of representation in the Executive;
 (ii) The nature of the Executive ;
 (iii) The method of filling the places in the Executive.
(i) Quantum of Representation
For the solution of this question, the principle which should be adopted is that 
the representation of the Hindus, the Muslims and the Scheduled Castes should 
be equal to the quantum of their representation in the Legislature.
With regard to the other minorities such as the Sikhs, Indian Christians and 
Anglo-Indians, it is difficult to give them representation in the Executive in 
strict proportion to their representation in the Legislature. This difficulty arises 
largely from the smallness of their numbers. If they are to get representation in 
the Executive in exact proportion to their numbers, the Executive would have to 
be enlarged to a fantastic degree. All that can be done, therefore, is to reserve 
a seat or two for them in the Cabinet for their representation and to establish 
a convention that they will get a fail portion of representation in the corps of 
Parliamentary Secretaries that will have to be raised, when the new Constitution 
comes into existence.
(ii) Nature of the Executive
In the Constitution of the Executive, I would propose the adoption of following 
principles :
 (1) It must be recognised that in a country like India where there is a 
perpetual antipathy between the majority and the minorities and on 
which account the danger of communal discrimination by majority against 
minorities forms an ever-present menace to the minorities, the executive 
power assumes far greater importance than the legislative power.
 (2) In view of (1) above, the system under which a party which has secured 
a majority at the poll is deemed entitled to form a Government on the 
presumption that it has the confidence of the majority is untenable in 
Indian conditions. The majority in India is a communal majority and not 
a political majority. That being the difference, the presumption that arises 
in England cannot be regarded as a valid presumption in the conditions 
of India.
 (3) The Executive should cease to be a Committee of the majority party in 
the Legislature. It should be so constituted that it will have its mandate 
not only from the majority but also from the minorities in the Legislature.
 (4) The Executive should be non-Parliamentary in the sense that it shall 
not be removeable before the term of the Legislature.
 (5) The Executive should be Parliamentary in the sense that the 
members of the Executive shall be chosen from the members of the
