358
 
DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES
Ordinarily, at a gathering such as this I would have spoken—and our 
people would expect me to speak—on any one of the social and political 
problems of the Scheduled Castes. But I do not propose to engage myself 
in a discourse on so sectarian a subject. Instead, I propose to speak on a 
topic, which is general and has a wider appeal, namely the shape and form 
of the future Constitution of India.
It may be as well for me to explain the reasons for my decision. For 
the moment, the responsibility for leading the movement of the Scheduled 
Castes and facing its day-to-day problems does not lie on my shoulders. On 
account of my office I am out of it and I have no desire to take it up. That 
is one reason why I do not propose to take up a sectarian subject which is 
related only to the Scheduled Castes.
The Scheduled Castes are often charged as being selfish, interested only 
in themselves ; that they have no constructive suggestions to make for the 
solution of the country’s political problem. The charge is entirely untrue ; and 
if it is true, the Untouchables will not be the only ones who will be found 
guilty of it. Most people in India do not make constructive suggestions. The 
reason is not that there are not people capable of constructive thought. The 
reason why all constructive thought remains bottled up is because a long 
and continuous propaganda has inculcated upon the minds of the generality 
of the people that nothing should be respected and nothing should be 
accepted unless it emanates from the Congress. It is this which has killed 
all constructive thought in this country. At the same time, I believe this 
charge against the Scheduled Castes should be repelled in a positive way by 
showing that the Scheduled Castes are capable of putting forth constructive 
proposals for the general political advancement of the country which the 
country, if it cares to, may consider. This is the second reason why I have 
on this occasion chosen this subject of general interest.
II
RESPONSIBILITY FOR FRAMING THE CONSTITUTION
Before I set out in concrete terms the constitutional proposals I have in 
mind, I wish to raise two preliminary issues. First is : Who should frame a 
Constitution for India ? It is necessary to raise this question because there 
are quite a lot of people in India who are hoping, if not asking, the British 
Government to resolve the deadlock and to frame a Constitution for India. 
I think there is a gross fallacy in such a view which needs to be exposed. A 
Constitution, framed by the British Government and imposed upon Indians, 
sufficed in the past. But if the nature of the future Constitution Indians are 
clamouring for, is borne in mind it will be clear that an imposed Constitution 
will not do.
The difference between the past Constitutions and the future Constitution 
of India is fundamental, and those, who still rely on the British for framing
