298
 
DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES
Sovereign Functions; (3) Revenue from Tributes ; and (4) Revenue from 
Taxes.
Under the first head fall all revenues from Posts and Telegraphs. Federal 
Railways, banking profits and other commercial operations. Under the second 
head come revenues from currency and coinage, from bona vacantia and 
territories administered directly by the Federal Government. Under the third 
head are included Contributions and Tributes from the Indian States.
The classification of Revenue from taxes follows upon the Powers of Taxation 
given to the Federal Government by the Constitution. The Powers of Taxation 
given to the Federal Government fall into three main categories. In the first 
category fall those powers of taxation which is wholly appropriable by the 
Federal Government. In the second category, fall those powers of taxation 
which are exercisable for raising revenue which is divisible between the Federal 
Government and the Provincial Governments.
The heads of revenue which fall under the first category of Taxing Powers 
cover those which are specifically mentioned in the Federal List—
 1. Duties of customs, including export duties.
 2. Duties of excise on tobacco and other goods manufactured or produced 
in India except—
 (a) alcoholic liquors for human consumption ;
 (b) opium, Indian hemp and other narcotic drugs and narcotics, non-
narcotic drugs ;
 (c) medical and toilet preparations containing alcoholic, or any sub-
stance included in sub-paragraph (b) of this entry.
 3. Corporation tax.
 4. Salt.
 5. State lotteries.
 6. Taxes on income other than agricultural income.
 7. Taxes on the capital value of the assets, exclusive of agricultural land 
of individuals and companies ; taxes, on the capital of companies.
 8. Duties in respect of succession to property other than agricultural land.
 9. The rates of stamp duty in respect of bills of exchange, cheques, 
promissory notes, bills of lading, letters of credit, policies of insurance 
proxies and receipts. 
 10. Terminal taxes on goods or passengers carried by railway or air ; taxes 
on railway fares and freights. 
 11. Fees in respect of any of the matters in this list but not including fees 
taken in any court.
In connection with this, attention might be drawn to the following items 
in the Concurrent List :
 1. Marriage and divorce.
 2. Wills, intestacy and succession.
 3. Transfer of Property and other agricultural lands.
