274
 
DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES
Mr. Bhimrao R. Ambedkar called and examined
Sir Frank Sly: He was a professor in the Sydenham College of Commerce. 
He graduated from the Elphinstone College, Bombay and was an M.A. of 
the Columbia University, New York. He was a Mahar by caste and his 
statement dealt largely with the depressed classes.
So far as the Hindu community was concerned, he divided them into two 
classes, touchables and untouchables; a distinction which was unmistakable 
in practice and more convenient than a division by castes. He recognised 
also a distinction between Brahmins and non-Brahmins, but this was of 
less importance. The distinction between Brahmin and non-Brahmin would 
not make much difference as regards the attitude of voter to a candidate, 
but the distinction between touchable and untouchable would make a very 
great difference.
He did not think there was any necessity for communal electorates for 
non-Brahmins as, if three-member constituencies were granted according to 
his supplementary statement, non-Brahmins would get some seats. From the 
figures in para 16 of his written statement he intended to show that on a 
uniform property qualification, a community which might be in a minority 
with regard to population might be in a majority in respect of voting strength ; 
some of the communities that he had mentioned might be minorities in the 
whole province, but majorities in particular districts. They should try to 
reduce the fever for communal representation as much as possible, and he 
therefore recommended three-member constituencies.
He wanted a variation of the franchise for the untouchables ; but, if 
constituencies with more than two members were adopted, the lowering of 
the franchise became a matter of less importance. In the case of a small 
constituency, for instance, the Marathas, it might be desirable to group them.
If a particular community had a majority of votes in a constituency, there 
was no need for that community to have separate communal representation. 
If the untouchables had a majority of votes in a particular constituency, 
he would not ask for communal representation. It was because they were 
in a minority and would always remain so on a uniform franchise that he 
asked for separate representation. His justification for asking for a low 
franchise was that as a result of being untouchable, the untouchables had 
no property ; they could not trade because they could not find customers. He 
remembered a case in which a Mahar woman was taken to the police court 
for selling water-melons. He was not aware of the conditions outside the 
Bombay Presidency. In the mills in the Bombay Presidency the untouchables 
were not yet allowed to work in the weaving department ; in one case an 
untouchable did work in the weaving department of a mill saying that he 
was a Mohammedan, and when found out, he was severely beaten.
