262
 
DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES
because the Marathas were better soldiers but because their theological 
bias prevented them from serving under low-caste officers. The prejudice 
was so strong that even the non-caste British had to stop recruitment from 
the untouchable classes. In like manner, the untouchables are refused 
service in the Police Force. In a great many of the Government offices it is 
impossible for an untouchable to get a place. Even in the mills a distinction 
is observed. The untouchables are not admitted in Weaving Departments of 
the Cotton Mills though many of them are professional weavers. An instance 
at hand may be cited from the school system of the Bombay Municipality. 
This most cosmopolitan city ruled by a Corporation with a greater freedom 
than any other Corporation in India has two different sets of schools ... one 
for the children of touchables and the other for those of the untouchables., 
This in itself is a point worthy of note. But there is something yet more 
noteworthy. Following the division of schools it has divided its teaching staff 
into untouchables and touchables. As the untouchable teachers are short of 
the demand, some of the untouchable schools are manned by teachers from 
the touchable class. The heart-killing fun of it is that if there is a higher 
grade open in untouchable school service, as there is bound to be because 
of a few untouchable trained teachers, a touchable teacher can be thrust 
into the grade. But if a higher grade is open in the touchable school service, 
no untouchable teacher can be thrust into that grade. He must wait till 
a vacancy occurs in the untouchable service ! ! ! Such is the ethics of the 
Hindu social life. Under it if the untouchables are poor, the committee, it 
may be hoped, will not deny them representation because of their small 
electoral roll but will see its way to grant them adequate representation to 
enable the untouchables to remove the evil conditions that bring about their 
poverty. At present when all the avenues of acquiring wealth are closed, it 
is unwise to require from the untouchables a high property qualification. 
To deny them the opportunities of acquiring wealth and then to ask from 
them a property qualification is to add insult to injury. Just what sort of 
franchise and just what pitch are required to produce sufficient voting strength 
from the untouchables ? In absence of data, I leave it to the Committee to 
decide. It would be better to pitch the franchise so low as to educate into 
political life as many untouchables as possible. They are too degraded to be 
conscious of themselves. I only wish to emphasize that in deciding upon the 
representation of the untouchables the Committee looking to their interests 
at stake will not let the extent of the electorate govern the number of 
representatives, but will rather let the number of representatives govern 
the extension of the electorate.
31. In this connection it would not be improper to remind the Committee 
of Lord Morley who is reported to have said that “the object of Government 
was that the Legislative Councils should represent truly and effectively 
with reasonable approach to the balance of real social forces, the wishes 
and needs of the communities concerned. This could not be done by Algebra,
