276
 
DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES
He suggested the lowering of the franchise qualification in the case of the 
depressed classes, as it should be the object of the Government to improve 
the lot of the community.
From an examination of the Census Report he would say that the problem 
of touchable and non-touchable existed in Sind, as although the greater 
proportion of the population there were Mohammedans, there were also 
Hindus. If special provision was going to be made for the Hindus in Sind, 
he did not see why special provision should not be made for the depressed 
classes also.
Mr. Banerjee: The depressed classes would be able to find 9 men who were 
able to speak English and who could represent their cause in the Council. 
The 6th standard was the class below the matriculation, and a man who had 
passed the 6th standard would be able to follow the debates in the Council. 
They had about 25 persons who had passed that standard.
For political purposes there would be no difficulty in defining the depressed 
classes, who were the same as the untouchables. No one who was not a 
member of a depressed class would think of trying to make himself out to be 
such, though such a thing might occur in the case of the backward classes.
He would accept 8 representatives as the minimum for the depressed 
classes, and they should be elected. Nominated representative would not be 
in a position adequately to represent their interests.
Mr. Crump: He had no experience of the problem and conditions of the 
untouchable classes in Sind, and could not say anything with regard to the 
statement that there was only one such class, viz., the Bhangis, there- His 
information was that the total Hindu population in Sind was 837,426 and 
the total of the untouchable classes was 135,224.
Mr. Natarajan: His view was that British rule in India was meant to 
provide equal opportunities for all, and that in transferring a large share 
of the power to popular assemblies, arrangements should be made whereby 
the hardships and disabilities entailed by the social system should not be 
reproduced and perpetuated in political institutions. As regards the exact 
position at present, he admitted that, for instance, at the Parel school which 
was meant for the depressed classes, there were many higher-caste pupils, 
who came there because it was a good school. Similarly as a professor he, 
being a member of a depressed class, had pupils of all classes and found no 
difficulty in dealing with his higher caste pupils. If the untouchable classes 
were recognized by Government by the grant of seats, their status would be 
raised and their powers would be stimulated. He was not very particular 
about the number of their seats; all he wanted was something adequate.
zz 
