346
 
DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES
The position of British India is that they can never get any responsibility 
at the Centre unless the Princes come into the Scheme. That means that 
British India has lost its right to claim Responsible Government for itself 
in its own name and independently of the Princes. This right was a vested 
right because it was the result of a claim made and accepted. That right has 
been lost because British India is made dependent for the realization of its 
destiny upon the wishes of the States. Of the two parts of this Federation. 
British India is the progressive part and the States form the unprogressive 
part. That the progressive part should be tied up to the chariot of the 
unprogressive and its path and destiny should be made dependent upon 
the unprogressive part constitutes the most tragic side of this Federation.
For this tragedy you have to blame your own national leaders. Fortunately 
for me I am not one of your national leaders. The utmost rank to which I 
have risen is that of a leader of the Untouchables. I find even that rank has 
been denied to me. Thakkar Bapa, the left hand man of Mahatma Gandhi. 
I call him left hand man only because Vallabhbhai Patel is the right hand 
man—very recently said that I was only the leader of the Mahars. He 
would not even allow me the leadership of the Untouchables of the Bombay 
Presidency. Whether what Thakkar Bapa said was said by him out of malice 
or out of love of truth does not worry me. For politics is not my first love nor 
is national leaderhip the goal of my life. On the other hand, when I see what 
disasters your national leaders have brought upon this country I feel relieved 
to know that I am not included in that august crowd. Believe me when I say 
that some of your national leaders were thoroughly unprepared for the job 
of constitution-making. They went to the Round Table Conference without 
any comparative study of constitutions and could propound no solutions to 
problems with which they were presented. Others who were undoubtedly 
competent to tackle the problem were like little children so charged with 
the ideal of Federation that they never cared to see whether what they 
were shaping was a real federation or a fraud in the name of Federation. 
This tragedy is entirely due to wrong leadership. I do not know if the steps 
taken can be retraced and whether the lost ground can be regained. But I 
think it is a right thing that the people of British India should know what 
they have lost. They have a federation of their own and they have right to 
demand responsibility for their federation.
There is another reason why it would be desirable to have a Federation 
of British India only. A Federation of British India and of the Indian States 
cannot work harmoniously. There are two elements which I am sure will 
produce a conflict between British India and the Indian States. The first 
element arises out of the difference in the position of the representatives 
of British India and those of the Indian States. The representatives of 
British India will be free men. The representatives of the Indian States
