267
 
EVIDENCE BEFORE THE SOUTHBOROUGH COMMITTEE
begin to have contact and co-operation with one another the resocialization 
of the fossilized attitude is bound to be the result. If the Hindus become 
resocialized with regard to their attitude towards Mohammedans, Christians, 
etc., and the Mohammedans, Christians, etc., become resocialized with 
regard to their attitudes towards the Hindus, or the touchable Hindus with 
regard to the untouchables, caste and divisions will vanish. If caste is an 
attitude and it is nothing else, it must be said to be dissolved when that 
particular attitude symbolizing the caste is dissolved. But the existing set 
attitude representing the diverse castes and groups will be dissolved only if 
the diverse groups meet together and take part in a common activity. Such 
changes of disposition and attitudes will not be ephemeral but will, in their 
turn influence associated life outside the Council Hall. The more opportunities 
are created for such conjoint activities the better. The resocialization will 
then be on a larger scale and bring about a speedier end of caste and 
groups. Thus those who condemn communal representation on the score of 
perpetuating the existing divisions will welcome it, on reflection, as a potent 
solvent for dissolving them.
41. The importance and necessity of communal and adequate representation 
of untouchables is beyond question. The depth of emotion with which the 
untouchables speak on this topic must have been easily gauged when the 
untouchables of the Madras Presidency told Mr. Montagu that there would 
be bloodshed if Home Rule for India was not accompanied by communal 
representation to the untouchables. The authors of the Report however are 
actuated by a faith in the intelligentsia to effect all reforms fox the elevation 
of the untouchables from permanent degradation and ostracism. They say 
“they find the educated Indian organizing effort not for political ends alone 
but for various forms of public and social service.”. As the authors have 
connived at the demands of the untouchables on this score it is but proper 
to investigate whether their faith is well grounded. On education and its 
social value the words of Joseph Addison are not too stale to be recalled. 
He said, “There can be no greater injury to human society than that good 
Talents among men should be held Honourable to those who are endowed 
with them without any regard how they are applied. The Gifts of Nature 
and the Accomplishments of Art are valuable but as they are exerted in the 
interest of virtue or governed by the Rules of Honour, we ought to abstract 
our minds from the observation of an excellence in those we converse with, 
till we have taken some notice or received some good information of the 
Disposition of their Minds, otherwise they make us fond of those whom our 
reason and judgment will tell us we ought to abhor.”
42. Statistics will show that the intelligentia and the Brahmin caste 
are exchangeable terms. The disposition of the intelligentsia is a Brahmin 
disposition. Its outlook is a Brahmin outlook. Though he has learned to 
speak in the name of all, the Brahmin leader is in no sense a leader of the
