484
 
DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES
circumstances are responsible for man’s activity If it were so, contends the 
behaviourist, it would presuppose a quiescent being which is a biological 
untruth. Man, it propounds, has the springs of action within him for he 
is born with certain tendencies to act. External circumstances do not 
induce activity. They only re-direct it. These tendencies to act, further 
says the behaviourist, in their working, become modified by the effect of 
the Social milieu in which they function. The modifications which these 
original tendencies undergo are of the highest importance, They constitute 
Education in the broadest sense of the word. All modifications, however, 
are not equally valuable and it is the business of the reformer to eliminate 
the circumstances and institutions that modify these tendencies for the 
socially worse and preserve and introduce those that will modify them 
for the socially better. Whatever that may be, it is of immense social 
value that these tendencies are capable of indefinite modifications. This 
is possible only because as Mr. Russell says “ Man’s impulses are not 
fixed from the beginning by his native dispositions. Within certain limits, 
they are profoundly modified by his circumstances and his way of life. 
The nature of these modifications ought to be studied, and the results 
of his study ought to be taken account of in judging the good or harm 
that is done by political and social institutions.”5
In six illuminating chapters Mr. Russell studies the modifications 
that human nature has undergone under the institutions of State, War, 
Property, Education, Marriage and Religion. It is impossible to give an 
adequate idea of Mr. Russell’s social philosophy by summarizing the 
contents of each one of these chapters. They are living contributions to 
the literature of the several subjects they deal with. Full of suggestions, 
they provoke thought and ought therefore to be read from the original. 
This might be unconventional so far as reviewing is concerned but is 
justified by the fact that this review is meant for an economic journal 
for the purposes of which, we need only attend to the analysis of the 
institution of Property and the modifications it is alleged by Mr. Russell 
to produce in human nature.
Before, however, proceeding to the task, it may be worth while discussing 
how the philosophy of war is related to the principles of growth as 
expounded by Mr. Russell.
At the outset it must be said that, because his is an anti-war book, those 
who read in him the philosophy of quieticism will have read him all wrong. 
For, though Mr. Russell is anxious for the abolition of war, he explicitly 
states that “in spite of all the destruction which is wrought by the impulses 
that lead to war, there is more hope for a nation which has these impulses
5. Principles of Social Reconstruction, p. 19.
