345
 
FEDERATION VERSUS FREEDOM
the motive is to use the Princes to support imperial interests and to curb 
the rising tide of democracy in British India. I should like to have another 
explanation, if there is any. I see none. That the Princes are wanted in the 
Federation to serve ends of the British Imperialism is beyond question. The 
Secretary of State for India speaking in Parliament during the course of the 
debate on the Government of India Bill admitted that “we should all welcome 
the entry into the Central Government of India of a great force of stability 
and imperial feeling represented by the Princes”. While the suppression of 
democracy in British India may not be the motive I am sure that that will 
be the consequence of the entry of the Princes in the Federation.
What a price has been paid for the entry of the Federation ! I do not wish 
to repeat what I have said. If you will re-call what I have said regarding the 
discrimination which has been made in favour of the Princes in the matter 
of representation, taxation, administration, legislation etc., you will know 
what benefits have been conferred, what rights have been surrendered and 
what immunities have been granted by British India to induce the Princes 
to come into the Federation. And what has British India got in return ?
If the Federal Constitution had provided full responsible Government, 
there would have been some compensation to British India for the price it 
has paid to the Princes for their joining the Federation. But British India 
has not got any responsibility worth the name. What British India has got 
is a system of responsibility halved in part and mutilated in substance by 
conditions and restraints. Not only British India has not been able to secure 
responsibility at the Centre commensurate with the sacrifices it has made 
for making the Federation easy for the Princes, but it has lost its claim for 
Dominion Status in its own right and independently of the Princes. Many 
people do not know what British India has lost and stands to lose in this 
business of an All India Federation. The new Constitution is the result 
of the struggle of the people of British India. It is the agitation and the 
sufferings of the people of British India which was the compelling force 
behind this constitution. What was the right which the people of British 
India were claiming for themselves ? As I have said, their first claim was 
good government in British India. Next they claimed self-government, that 
is responsible government for British India. Lastly, they claimed Dominion 
Status for British India. Each one of these claims have been accepted by 
the British Parliament. In 1917 the British Parliament accepted the goal of 
Responsible Government. In 1929 the English Nation accepted the goal of 
Dominion Status, Now it must be emphasised that each time the claim was 
made, it was made in the name of the people of British India. Each time it 
was accepted in relation to the people of British India. What is going to be 
the position of British India as a result of the Federation ?
