323
 
FEDERATION VERSUS FREEDOM
Governmental Authority and that this classification has resulted in that 
division of subjects which for brevity’s sake may be designated as Transferred 
and Reserved. The Constitution does not stop here. It goes further and 
proceeds to divide the category of Transferred subjects into two classes. 
(1) subjects over which the Ministers’ Governmental Authority carries with it 
administrative control and (2) subjects over which the Governmental Authority 
of Ministers does not carry with it administrative control. As an illustration 
of this classification may be mentioned the case of Railways. Railways are 
a transferred subject. The Governmental Authority of the Ministers extends 
to Railways. But the Ministers have no right to exercise any administrative 
control over the Railways. The administrative control over Railways is vested 
in what is called the Railway Authority. The distinction between Governmental 
Authority with Administrative Control and Governmental Authority without 
administrative control is not a distinction without difference. On the other 
hand the difference between the two positions is very real. That difference 
is made clear in sub-clause (2) of section 181 in the matter of Railways. 
That distinction is the distinction between authority to lay down a policy 
and competency to act. It is for those who plead for this Federation to say 
whether there is reality of responsibility in a Scheme of Government where 
there is a divorce between competence to act and authority to lay down policy.
Two things are clear in regard to this Responsibility in the Federal 
Scheme. First is that this responsibility is limited in its ambit. Secondly it 
is not real because it is fettered by the restraints arising from the special 
responsibilities of the Governor-General and from the withdrawal from the 
Ministers Governmental Authority of their competence to act in certain 
subjects such as the Railways, although they are Transferred subjects.
I have stated that the system of responsibility in the Federal Scheme 
resembles the system of dyarchy introduced into the provinces under the 
Act of 1919. But if the Scheme of responsibility in the Federation was 
compared with the system of dyarchy introduced into the Provinces it will 
be found that the former is designed to yield less responsibility than the 
latter. There are two things introduced in the Federal Scheme which were 
not to be found in the dyarchy in the Provinces and there existed one thing 
in the dyarchy which is absent in the Federation. The presence of the two 
and the absence of one makes this dyarchy in the Federation worse than 
the dyarchy in the Provinces.
Of the two things that are new in the Federal Scheme one is the 
principle of special responsibilities of the Governor-General in respect of 
the Transferred field and the other is the separation between Governmental 
Authority from administrative control in respect of matters falling within 
the Transferred field. These two are new things and did not exist in the 
dyarchical constitution in the provinces.
