306
 
DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES
(4) Where by virtue of this section powers and duties have been conferred 
or imposed upon a Province or a Federated State or officers or authorities 
thereof, there shall be paid by the Federation to the Province or State such 
sum as may be agreed, or, in default of agreement, as may be determined 
by an arbitrator appointed by the Chief Justice of India, in respect of any 
extra cost of administration incurred by the Province or State in connection 
with the exercise of those powers and duties.”
It is quite possible for States and Provinces to combine to rob the 
Federation of all administrative powers and make it only a law making 
body.
A more staggering situation however is created by section 125. It is 
in the following terms:
“125. (1) Notwithstanding anything in this Act, agreements may, and, if 
provision has been made in that behalf by the Instrument of Accession of 
the State, shall be made between the Governor-General and the Ruler of 
a Federated State for the exercise by the Ruler or his officers of functions 
in relation to the administration in his State of any law of the Federal 
Legislature which applies therein.
(2) An agreement made under this section shall contain provisions enabling 
the Governor-General in his discretion to satisfy himself, by inspection or 
otherwise that the administration of the law to which the agreement relates 
is carried out in accordance with the policy of the Federal Government and, 
if he is not so satisfied, the Governor-General, acting in his discretion, may 
issue such directions to the Ruler as he thinks fit.
(3) All courts shall take judicial notice of any agreement made under 
this section.”.
This section means that a State by its Instrument of Accession may 
stipulate that the administration of Federal laws in the State shall be 
carried out by the State agency and not by the agency of the Federation 
and if it does so stipulate then the Federation shall have no administrative 
power inside the State. The benefit of a law depends upon its administration. 
A law may turn out to be of no avail because the administration is 
either inefficient or corrupt. To deprive the Federal Government of its 
administrative powers is really to cripple the Federal Government. There 
is no Federation in which some units of the Federation are permitted to 
say that the Federal Government shall have no administrative powers in 
their territory. The Indian Federation is an exception. Not only is there a 
difference between the Provinces and the States in this matter but they 
also differ in their liability to supervision and direction by the Federal
