 
MAHARASHTRA AS A LINGUISTIC PROVINCE
123
51. So much for Prof. Dantwala’s arguments. I will now examine 
Prof. Gheewala’s arguments. Prof. Gheewala also relies on Lord Acton. 
He quotes a portion of a passage from Lord Acton’s Essay on Nationality. 
I reproduce below the passage in full :
“The greatest adversary of the rights of nationality is the modern theory 
of nationality. By making the State and the nation commensurate with 
each other in theory, it reduces practically to a subject condition all other 
nationalities that may be within the boundary. It cannot admit them to an 
equality with the ruling nation which constitutes the State, because the 
State would then cease to be national, which would be a contradiction of 
the principle of its existence. According, therefore, to the degree of humanity 
and civilization in that dominant body which claims all the rights of the 
community, the inferior races are exterminated, or reduced to servitude, or 
outlawed, or put in a condition of dependence.”
52. I do not understand why the learned Professor has dragged in the 
name of Lord Acton. The passage does not really help him. There is one 
thing which seems to be uppermost in his mind. He thinks that if Bombay 
is included in Maharashtra the Province of Maharashtra will consist of 
two nationalities—one consisting of the Marathi-speaking people and the 
other of the Gujarathi-speaking people and the Marathi-speaking people 
who would be the dominant class will reduce the Gujarathi-speaking 
people to a subject condition. It is in support of this he thought of citing 
Lord Acton. Such a possibility is always there. There is no objection to 
the way in which he has presented the problem. But there are great 
objections to the conclusions he draws.
53. In the first place, in a country like India in which society is 
throughout communally organized it is obvious that in whatever way it 
is divided into areas for administrative purposes, in every area there will 
always be one community which by its numbers happens to be a dominant 
community. As a dominant community it becomes a sole heir to all political 
power, which the area gets. If Marathi-speaking people in a unified 
Maharashtra with Bombay thrown into it will become dominant over the 
Gujarathi-speaking people, will this prospect be confined to Maharashtra 
only ? Will such a phenomena not occur within the Marathi-speaking 
people ? Will it not be found in Gujarat if Gujarat became a separate 
Province ? I am quite certain that within the Marathi-speaking people 
who are sharply divided between the Marathas and the non-Marathas, the 
Marathas being a dominant class will reduce both Gujarathi-speaking and 
the non-Marathas to a subject condition. In the same way in Gujarat in 
some parts the Anavil Brahmins from a dominant class. In other parts it is 
the Patidars who form a dominant class. It is quite likely that the Anavils 
and the Patidars will reduce the condition of the other communities to 
