256
 
DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES
them with that common respect which one man owes to another. The idea 
that they have been born to their lot is so ingrained in their mind that it 
never occurs to them to think that their fate is anything but irrevocable. 
Nothing will ever persuade them that men are all made of the same clay, 
or that they have the right to insist on better treatment than that meted 
out to them.
22. The exact description of the treatment cannot be attempted. The 
word untouchable is an epitome of their ills and sufferings. Not only has 
untouchability arrested the growth of their personality but also it comes in 
the way of their material well-being. It has also deprived them of certain 
civil rights. For instance, in Konkan the untouchables are prohibited from 
using the public road. If some high caste man happens to cross him, he has 
to be out of the way and stand at such a distance that his shadow will not 
fall on the high caste man. The untouchable is not even a citizen. Citizen 
ship is a bundle of rights such as (1) personal liberty, (2) personal security, 
(3) rights to hold private property, (4) equality before law, (5) liberty of 
conscience, (6) freedom of opinion and speech, (7) right of assembly, (8) right 
of representation in a country’s Government and (9) right to hold office under 
the State. The British Government by gradual growth may be said to have 
conceded these rights at least in theory to its Indian subjects. The right 
of representation and the right to hold office under the State are the two 
most important rights that make up citizenship. But the untouchability of 
the untouchables puts these rights far beyond their reach. In a few places 
they do not even possess such insignificant rights as personal liberty and 
personal security, and equality before law is not always assured to them. 
These are the interests of the untouchables. And as can be easily seen they 
can be represented by the untouchables alone. They are distinctively their 
own interests and none else can truly voice them. A free trade interest can 
be voiced by a Brahmin, a Mohammedan or a Maratha equally well. But 
none of these can speak for the interests of the untouchables because they 
are not untouchables. Untouchability constitutes a definite set of interests 
which the untouchables alone can speak for. Hence it is evident that we 
must find the untouchables to represent their grievances which are their 
interests and, secondly, we must find them in such numbers as will constitute 
a force sufficient to claim redress.
23. Now, will a general territorial electorate provided for the adequate 
return of the untouchables to the law-making body ? Referring back to 
the figures we find that the untouchables (represented in the table by the 
Mahars), though they formed 69.4 in every thousand of the population, did 
not claim even a voter from their class. Under such circumstances it is 
impossible for them to elect their own man in a general electorate. On the 
other hand they must despair of any votes being cast by the touchable Hindus 
for an untouchable candidate. The gradation of castes produces a certain
