STATES AND MINORITIES
413
in the Centre was of the British type or what is called by Constitutional 
Lawyers Parliamentary Executive as opposed to the American type of 
Executive which in contradistinction of the British type is called Non-
Parliamentary Executive. The question is whether the pattern for the 
Executive adopted in the two Acts should be retained or whether it should 
be abandoned and if so what model should be adopted in its place. Before 
giving final opinion on this issue it would be desirable to set out the special 
features of the British type of the Executive and the consequences that are 
likely to follow if it was applied to India.
The following may be taken to be the special features of British or the 
Parliamentary Executive :
 (1) It gives a party which has secured a majority in the Legislature the 
right to form a Government.
 (2) It gives the majority party the right to exclude from Government 
persons who do not belong to the Party.
 (3) The Government so formed continues in office only so long as it can 
command a majority in the Legislature. If it ceases to command a 
majority it is bound to resign either in favour of another Government 
formed out of the existing Legislature or in favour of a new 
Government formed out of a newly elected Legislature.
As to the consequences that would follow if the British System was applied 
to India the situation can be summed up in the following proposition :
 (1) The British System of Government by a Cabinet of the majority 
party rests on the premise that the majority is a political majority. 
In India the majority is a communal majority. No matter what social 
and political programme it may have the majority will retain its 
character of being a communal majority. Nothing can alter this fact. 
Given this fact it is clear that if the British System was copied it 
would result in permanently vesting Executive power in a Communal 
majority.
 (2) The British System of Government imposes no obligation upon the 
Majority Party to include in its cabinet the representatives of Minority 
Party. If applied to India the consequence will be obvious. It would 
make the majority community a governing class and the minority 
community a subject race. It would mean that a communal majority 
will be free to run the administration according to its own ideas of 
what is good for the minorities. Such a state of affairs could not be 
called democracy. It will have to be called imperialism.
In the light of these consequences it is obvious that the introduction of British 
type of the Executive will be full of menace to the life, liberty and pursuit of 
happiness of the minorities in general and of the Untouchables in particular.
