490
 
DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES
knowing as we do the laws of consumption12 is there a possibility of such 
mutilation? The answer, as we shall see, is in the negative.
The laws of consumption, it may be noted, are simply certain deductions 
from the economic doctrine of the utility theory of value Formulated, as a 
reaction to the classical theory by Cournot, Gossen, Walres Menger and 
Jevons, it no longer thinks of utility as a quality inherent in the objective 
thing or condition but as dependent upon the capacity it possesses to satisfy 
human wants. This being so, the utility of an object varies according to the 
varying condition of the organism needing satisfaction. Even an object of our 
strongest desire like food may please or disgust, according as we are hungry 
or have over-indulged the appetite. Thus utility diminishes as satisfaction 
increases. In other words as satisfaction is the pleasurable activity of a 
particular organ or a group of them, the curve representing the relation of 
the organ to the object of its satisfaction varies inversely with the condition 
of the organ.
If Mr. Russell had carefully gone into the implications of this psychological 
analysis, he would certainly have avoided the misconception in question. For 
what does the psychological analysis really mean ? Why does the utility of an 
object tend to be zero or even negative ? This takes place it may be argued 
either (1) because at some point in the process of satisfaction the particular 
organ irritated ceases to derive any further satisfaction by feeding itself on 
the object of its craving or (2) because other organs needing a different kind 
of satisfaction clamour against the over-indulgence of some one organ at their 
expense. Prof. Giddings holding the latter view says “ if the cravings of a 
particular organ or a group of organs are being liberally met with appropriate 
satisfactions, while other organs suffer deprivation, the neglected organs 
set up a protest, which is usually sufficiently importunate to compel us to 
attempt their appeasing. The hunger of the neglected parts of our nature 
normally takes possession of consciousness, and diverts our attention and 
our efforts from the organ which is receiving more than its due share of 
indulgence”.13 Of the two alternative explanations that of Prof. Giddings is 
probably the more correct. Having regard to the behaviouristic hypothesis, of 
the organism as an active entity, it is but proper to suppose that there does 
exist this hunger of the entire organism for a varied satisfaction appropriate 
to each of its organ which would engender such a protest. It is this protest 
that compels obedience to what is called the law of variety in consumption. 
If this is a fact it is difficult to understand how one organ by perpetual 
dominance can mutilate the whole organism. On the other hand, though 
one at a time, all the appetites have their turn. Human nature is, thus, 
fortunately, provided by its very make-up against a one-sided development 
leaving no doubt as to its promise for an all-round development in a 
congenial environment. Whether it will be able to obtain the miscellaneous
12. For a brilliant discussion of them C/o. Prof. S. N. Patten’s “A Theory of Consumption”.
13. Democracy and Empire, p. 19.
