336
 
DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES
The Solicitor-General said:
“The States will not agree to federate in a structure which within 
limits, is definite and certain and obviously we could not completely alter 
the structure afterwards. The purpose of this clause is to lay down those 
matters which can be altered without being regarded as fundamental or as 
impinging on the Instrument of Accession.” ...... “If the structure were to 
be altered in fundamental respects, of course the States would clearly have 
the right to say “This is not the Federation to which we have acceded.”
The Secretary of State said :
“If you amend the parts of the Bill which affect the States, obviously 
you would be altering the conditions on which they have acceded and 
that would certainly create a situation in which the Princes could rightly 
claim that their Instrument of Accession had been altered. It certainly 
means that we cannot amend any part of the Bill which affects what is 
virtually the treaties under which the Princes come in. If we make a 
change in the Bill as to strike at the basis of their Instrument of Accession 
then obviously, the agreement has been broken between the Princes and 
Parliament and the Princes are free.”
“It will be accepted by every one that under the general scheme of the 
Bill the States, when they are asked to federate are entitled to know with 
certainty certain aspects at any rate, of the Federation to which they are 
to accede. It would be an absurd position if having said to a State this 
month, “Will you accede to a Federation,” it was possible next month for 
this House to alter in some fundamental respects the provisions of the 
Federation to which the State was held to have acceded. Therefore, some 
schedule of this kind is necessary. It is a sorting out of the various parts 
of the Bill which should be capable of amendment without in any sense 
altering from the point of view of the States the constitutional machinery 
to which they have acceded. The scheme of the Schedule is to set out the 
provisions of the Act, the amendment whereof is not to affect the validity 
of the Instrument of Accession of a State.”
“One sees set out those parts of the Bill the amendment of which is not 
to affect the validity of the Instrument of Accession of a State, and on the 
opposite side there are set out those subjects the amendment of which, 
would affect the validity of accession. In drawing up a schedule of this 
kind one has to proceed with great care in defining what are the legitimate 
matters on which the Rulers of a State are entitled to ask that there shall 
be no amendment without their consent. Of course there will be border-line 
cases. There could be minor amendments, which would not really make any 
great difference to the existing position, and it would be very unreasonable
