268
 
DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES
people. He is a leader of his caste at best, for he feels them as he does 
for no other people. It is not intended to say that there are no Brahmins 
who feel for the untouchables. To be just, there are a few more moderate 
and rational Brahmins who admit the frightful nature of the institution 
of untouchability in the abstract and perceive the dangers to society with 
which it is fraught. But the great majority of the Brahmins are those who 
doggedly deny the horrors of the system in the teeth of such a mass of 
evidence as never was brought to bear on any other subject and to which 
the experience of every day contributes its immense amount; who, when they 
speak of freedom, mean the freedom to oppress their kind and to be savage, 
merciless and cruel, and whose inalienable rights can only have their growth 
in the wrongs of the untouchables. Their delicate gentility will neither bear 
the Englishmen as superior nor will it brook the untouchables as equal. “I 
will not tolerate a man above me, and of those below none must approach 
too near” sums up the true spirit of their social as well as political creed. 
Those who speak against the anti-social spirit of the Brahmin leaders are 
often cautioned that in their denunciation they do not pay sufficient regard 
to the existence of the first class of Brahmin leaders. This is no doubt the 
case. Noble but very rare instances of personal and pecuniary sacrifice may 
be found among them just as may be found to be tender in the exercise of 
their unnatural power. Still it is to be feared that this injustice is inseparable 
from the state of things with which humanity and truth are invoked to deal. 
The miserable state of the untouchables is not a bit more tolerable because 
some tender hearts are bound to show sympathy, nor can the indignant tide 
of honest wrath stand still because in its course it overwhelms a few who 
are comparatively innocent among a host of guilty.
43. The trend of nationalism in India does not warrant us to believe that 
the few who are sympathetic will grow in volume. On the other hand it is 
the host of guilty that time is sure to multiply. With the growth of political 
agitation, the agitation for social reform has subsided and has even vanished 
The Prarthana Samaj, the Brahmo Samaj with their elevating influence have 
become things of the past. The future has few things like these in store. 
The growth of education if it is confined to one class, will not necessarily 
lead to liberalism. It may lead to the justification and conservation of class 
interest; and instead of creating the liberators of the down-trodden, it may 
create champions of the past and the supporters of the status quo. Isn’t, 
this the effect of education so far ? That it will take a new course in future 
ceteris paribus, there is no ground to believe. Therefore, instead of leaving 
the untouchables to the mercy of the higher castes, the wiser policy would 
be to give power to the untouchables themselves who are anxious, not like 
others, to usurp power but only to assert their natural place in society.
44. This gigantic world war, however motivated, has yielded what is 
known as the principle of self-determination which is to govern international
