422
 
DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES
 (ii) the substitution of separate electorates.
5. One of the issues which has embittered the relations between the Hindus 
and the Scheduled Castes in the political field is the issue of electorate. The 
Scheduled Castes are insisting upon separate electorates. The Hindus are 
equally insistent on opposing the demand. To arrive at a settlement on this 
issue—without which there can be no peace and amity between the Hindus 
and the Scheduled Castes—it is necessary to determine who is right and who 
is wrong and whether the opposition is based on rational grounds or is based 
on mere prejudice.
6. The grounds which are generally urged against the demand of the Scheduled 
Castes for separate electorates are :
 (i) that the Scheduled Castes are not a minority;
 (ii) that the Scheduled Castes are Hindus and therefore they cannot have 
separate electorates;
 (iii) that separate electorates will perpetuate untouchability; 
 (iv) that separate electorates are anti-national; and
 (v) that separate electorates enables British Imperialism to influence the 
communities having separate electorates to act against the interests of 
the country.
7. Are these arguments valid ?
 (i) To say that the Scheduled Castes are not a minority is to misunderstand 
the meaning of the word ‘minority’. Separation in religion is not the only 
test of a minority. Nor is it a good and efficient test. Social discrimination 
constitutes the real test for determining whether a social group is or 
is not a minority. Even Mr. Gandhi thought it logical and practical to 
adopt this test in preference to that of religious separation. Following 
this test, Mr. Gandhi in an editorial under the heading. ‘The Fiction of 
Majority’ in the Harijan dated 21st October 1939 has given his opinion 
that the Scheduled Castes are the only real minority in India.
 (ii) To argue that the Scheduled Castes are Hindus and therefore 
cannot demand separate electorates is to put the same argument 
in a different form. To make religious affiliation the determining 
factor for constitutional safeguards is to overlook the fact that the 
religious affiliation may be accompanied by an intense degree of social 
separation and discrimination. The belief that separate electorates go 
with separation in religion arises from the fact that those minorities 
who have been given separate electorates happen to be religious 
minorities. This, however, is not correct. Muslims are given separate 
electorates not because they are different from Hindus in point of 
religion. They are given separate electorates because—and this is the 
fundamental fact—the social relations between the Hindus and the
