338
 
DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES
Schedule II is a very extensive collection of constitutional don’ts. I have 
given just a few of them. They will however be sufficient to show how limited 
is the authority of Parliament to make changes in the Constitution.
Why is the authority of Parliament limited ? To understand this it is 
necessary to note the exact limits of the authority of Parliament. According 
to law the authority of the Parliament to legislate extends only to countries 
which are the Dominions of the King. The States did not form part of the 
Dominions of the King and none of them not even the finest of them was 
subject to the legislative authority of Parliament. The Government of India 
Act makes no change in this status of the States. The States remain foreign 
territories inspite of the Federation, and as they were before Federation. 
This is the most extraordinary state about the Indian Federation, namely 
that the different units are as between themselves foreign states. As the 
Act does not make the States Dominions of the King, Parliament gets no 
right to legislate about them. Parliament derives its authority over the 
States from the Instrument of Accession. That being so, the authority of 
Parliament cannot but be limited to what is transferred to it by the States 
through their instruments. To use the language of the Privy Council itself, 
as the stream can rise no higher than its source, similarly, Parliament 
cannot have powers over the States greater than those given to them by 
the Instrument of Accession. This explains why the authority of Parliament 
to amend the Constitution is limited.
The analysis made so far shows that the authority of Parliament 10 
change is limited by the Instrument of Accession and that for any excess 
of authority, there must be prior consent given by the Princes. As a legal 
effect of the provisions of the Act it may not be shocking. But consider the 
fact that the provisions in regard to which Parliament has no power to 
change include those that relate to the transposition of such subjects as 
Defence and External affairs from the category of Reserved to that of the 
Transferred and that it will not have that power unless the Princes consent 
expressly to confer that authority on Parliament and permit it to do so. You 
will be in a position to realize how grave are going to be the consequences 
of this Federation. The establishment of the Federation means that the 
mastery has gone from the hands of Parliament into the hands of Princes. 
This Federation makes the Princes the arbiters of destiny. Without their 
consent India cannot politically advance.
Other consequences of this Federation might also be noted. I will just 
refer to one. It is that this federation, if accepted will weaken the position 
of British Indians in their struggle for change. Hitherto, in the struggle 
between the Indian people and the British Parliament the latter was 
always the weaker party. It had nothing to oppose the right of the people 
to change except its will. After the Federation the position is bound to be 
reversed. The Indian people would be in a weaker position and Parliament
