322
 
DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES
By reading them together you will get an idea of the extent of this 
responsibility. According to these two sections the field of Governmental 
Authority is divided into two categories. In one category are put four 
subjects (1) Defence, (2) Ecclesiastical affairs, (3) External affairs, and 
(4) the Administration of Tribal Areas. The rest of the subjects within the 
executive authority of the Federation are put in another and a separate 
category. The executive authority for both these categories is vested in the 
Governor-General. But a distinction is made between them in the matter of 
Governmental Authority. The Governmental Authority in respect of the four 
subjects falling in the first category is under the Act the Governor-General 
in his discretion. The Governmental Authority in respect of the rest of the 
subjects put in the second category is under the Act, the Governor-General 
acting on the advice of the Minister. In the case of the first four subjects 
the Government is not responsible to the Legislature, because the Governor-
General in whom the Governmental Authority in respect of these four 
subjects is vested is not removable by the legislature. In the case of the rest 
of the subjects the Government is responsible to the Legislature, because 
the ministers on whose advice the Governmental Authority is exercisable 
are removable by the Legislature. The responsiblity in the Federal scheme 
is therefore a case of limited responsibility. The responsibility does not 
extend to Defence and Foreign Affairs which after all are the most important 
subjects from social, political and financial point of view. The scheme has 
a close resemblance to dyarchy with the division of subjects into Reserved 
and Transferred such as was the basis of the Montagu-Chelmsford Reforms, 
which was embodied in the Provincial Constitution under the Government 
of India Act of 1919. The scheme of resposibility in the Federal Constitution 
under the Act of 1935 is an exact replica of the scheme of responsibility in 
the Provincial Constitution under the Act of 1919.
Is this responsibility real ? My answer is in the negative. I will give you 
my reasons. Firstly the field of responsibility besides being limited is not a 
free field of activity for ministers. To realize how fettered this limited field 
of responsibility is, we must note certain restraints which have been imposed 
upon the powers of the Ministers when acting in the field of responsibility.
The first set of restraints imposed upon the authority of the Ministers 
when acting in the field of responsibility arises from what are called the 
special responsibilities of the Governor-General.
There exist another set of restraints on the authority of the Ministers while 
exercising the Governmental Authority in respect of transferred subjects. To 
understand this you must understand one special feature of this Federal 
constitution. The constitution classifies subjects from the stand-point of
