255
 
EVIDENCE BEFORE THE SOUTHBOROUGH COMMITTEE
So argued, the case for special provision of the Marathas can be sustained 
and should be admitted.
18. The question is in what form the provision should take. In my 
opinion such provision instead of taking the form of separate electorates of 
reserved seats should take the form of a low pitched franchise. The franchise 
for the non-Brahmin should be lower than that for the Brahmin. By this 
arrangement the Marathas would improve their position on the voters’ list 
and the altogether favoured position of the Brahmin would be equalized. It is 
in the interest of all that the Brahmin should not play such a preponderant 
part in politics as he has been doing hitherto. He has exerted a pernicious 
influence on the social life of the country and it is in the interest of all that 
his pernicious influence should be kept at a minimum in politics. As he is 
the most exclusive he is most anti-social.
19. Even the authors of the report on constitutional reforms are not in 
favour of a limited or uniform franchise. They say, “We consider that the 
limitations of the franchise, which it is obviously desirable to make as 
broad as possible, should be determined rather with reference to practical 
difficulties than to any prior considerations as to the degree of education 
or amount of income which may be held to constitute a qualification. It is 
possible that owing to unequal distribution of population and wealth it may 
be necessary to differentiate the qualifications for a vote not merely between 
provinces, but between different parts of the same province” (P. 147) To this 
I should like to add that we should differentiate the qualifications for a vote 
not merely between provinces or parts thereof but between communities 
of the same province. Without this differentiation some communities with 
a small but wealthy or educated population will secure more votes than a 
large community consisting of poor and uneducated members. Uniformity 
in franchise should be dispensed with. An important result will be that 
communal representation or reservation of seats for some non-Brahmin 
communities who are now clamouring for it would be avoided.
20. The untouchables are usually regarded as objects of pity but they are 
ignored in any political scheme on the score that they have no interests to 
protect. And yet their interests are the greatest. Not that they have large 
property to protect from confiscation. But they have their very persona 
confiscated. The socio religious disabilities have dehumanized the untouchables 
and their interests at stake are therefore the interests of humanity. The 
interests of property are nothing before such primary interests.
21. If one agrees with the definition of slave as given by Plato, who 
defines him as one who accepts from another the purposes which control 
his conduct, the untouchables are really slaves. The untouchables are so 
socialized as never to complain of their low estate. Still less do they ever 
dream of trying to improve their lot, by forcing the other classes to treat
