466
 
DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES
According to the Hon. Mr. Keatinge an economic holding is :—
“a holding which allows a man chance of producing sufficient to support 
himself and his family in reasonable comfort, after paying his necessary 
expenses.”16
His definition of an economic holding will be accepted, we may expect, 
by the Baroda Committee; for, it does not differ from its own, given above 
as third in order. Assuming they agree, we may now proceed to see how 
far tenable this definition is.
It is plain that these definitions including that of Professor Jevons 
view an economic holding from the stand-point of consumption rather 
than of production. In this lies their error; for consumption is not the 
correct standard by which to judge the economic character of a holding. 
It would be perverse accounting to condemn a farm as not paying because 
its total output does not support the family of the farmer though as a 
pro-rata return for each of his investments it is the highest. The family 
of a farmer can only be looked upon in the light of so much labour corps 
at his disposal. It may well be that some portion of this labour corps is 
superfluous, though it has to be supported merely in obedience to social 
custom as is the case in India. But if our social custom compels a farmer 
to support some of his family members even when he cannot effectively 
make any use of them on his farm we must be careful not to find fault 
with the produce of the farm because it does not suffice to provide for the 
workers as well as the dependants that may happen to compose the family. 
The adoption of such an accounting system will declare many enterprises 
as failures when they will be the most successful. There can be no true 
economic relation between the family of the entrepreneur and the total 
out-turn of his farm or industry. True economic relation can subsist only 
between the total out-turn and the investments. If the total out-turn pays 
for all the investments no producer in his senses will ever contemplate 
closing his industry because the total out-turn does not support his family. 
This is evident; for though production is for the purpose of consumption it 
is for the consumption only of those who help to produce. It follows, then, 
that if the relation between out-turn and investments is a true economic 
relation, we can only speak of a farm as economic, i.e., paying in the 
sense of production and not in the sense of consumption. Any definition, 
therefore, that leans on consumption mistakes the nature of an economic 
holding which is essentially an enterprise in production.
Before going further, we must clear the ground by a few preliminary 
remarks to facilitate the understanding of an economic holding from the 
standpoint of production.
16. Rural Economy in the Bombay Deccan, p. 51.
