252
 
DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES
candidates without any regard for their persona. As a matter of fact, the 
electors before they are electors are primarily members of a group. The 
persona of the candidates does matter with them. Naturally, therefore, as 
members of a group they prefer the candidate who belongs to their group 
to another candidate who does not belong to their group though both of 
them claim to represent the same interest. As a result of this preference 
the electors of a large group are destined to rise to a higher position of 
becoming eventual law-makers, while the electors of a smaller group for no 
fault of theirs are doomed to a lower position of remaining electors. One crux 
of popular Government is the representation of interests and opinions. The 
other crux is personal representation. Territorial constituencies fail to create 
popular Government because they fail to secure personal representation to 
members of minor groups.
11. If this is a correct analysis as to how the social divisions operate to the 
prejudice of the political life of some communities, never was a more improper 
remedy advocated to meet the situation than proportional representation. 
Proportional representation is intended to give proportionate representation 
to views. It presupposes that voters vote for a candidate because of his views 
and not because of his persona. Proportional representation is ill-suited for 
the purpose in hand.
12. We have therefore two possible methods of meeting the situation : 
either to reserve seats in plural constituencies for those minorities that cannot 
otherwise secure personal representation or grant communal electorates. Both 
have their usefulness. So far as the representation of the Mohammedans is 
concerned, it is highly desirable that they should participate in a general 
election with seats reserved for them in plural constituencies. The angularity 
of the division that separates the Hindus and Mohammedans is already 
sharp and communal representation, it may be urged, sharpens it the 
more. Communal election, however, seems to be a settled fact, so far as the 
Mohammedans are concerned and nothing is likely to alter it, even though 
alteration is likely to be beneficial.
13. But this argument is mainly intended to concern itself with the 
representation of the Hindus in general, and of the untouchable Hindus in 
particular. The discussion of the representation of the Hindus may be best 
introduced by a quotation which expresses the newer consciousness that has 
arisen in the various Hindu groups. It is said :
“A community may claim representation only on the ground of separate interests 
which require protection. In India, such interests are of three kinds only : either 
they arise out of religious antipathies which are pretty strong in India, or out of 
the backward state of a community in educational matters, or out of the socio-
religious disabilities to which a community may be subject. Confining ourselves 
to the Hindu communities there are certain communities who, besides being very
