 
MAHARASHTRA AS A LINGUISTIC PROVINCE
111
took five or ten years to give effect to the Settlement. But the resolution is 
only an escapism. It does not settle the issue. It only adjourns the controversy. 
The main question must therefore be tackled right now.
Ground for the exclusion of Bombay from Maharashtra
24. The arguments urged in favour of separating Bombay from Maharashtra 
are set out below :
 (1) Bombay was never a part of Maharashtra.1
 (2) Bombay was never a part of the Maratha Empire.2
 (3) The Marathi-speaking people do not form a majority of the population 
of the City of Bombay.3
 (4) Gujarathis have been old residents of Bombay.4
 (5) Bombay is a trade centre for vast areas outside Maharashtra. 
Therefore, Bombay cannot be claimed by Maharashtra. It belongs 
to the whole of India.5
 (6) It is the Gujarathi-speaking people of Bombay who have built up the 
trade and industry of Bombay. The Maharashtrians have been only 
clerks and coolies. It would be wrong to place the owners of trade 
and industry under the political dominance of the working classes 
who form the bulk of Maharashtrians.6
 (7) Maharashtra wants Bombay to be included in Maharashtra because 
it wants to live on the surplus of Bombay.7
 (8) A multi-lingual State is better. It is not so fatal to the liberty of 
smaller people.8
 (9) Regrouping of Provinces should be on rational lines and not on 
national lines.9
Burden of Proof
25. On an examination of these points it is obvious that points (1) and 
(2) are preliminary in the sense that they help us to decide on whom rests 
the burden of proof. If it is proved that Bombay is part of Maharashtra, 
then the burden of proof for separating it from Maharashtra must fall upon 
those who urge that it should be separated and not upon those who claim 
that it should remain part of Maharashtra. I will therefore deal with these 
two points first.
1. Prof. Gheewala—Free Press Journal, September 6, 1948, and Prof. Moraes—Free Press Journal, 
September 18, 1948.
2. Ibid.
3. Prof. C. N. Vakil, Free Press Journal, September 21, 1948.
4. Prof. Gheewala, Free Free Press Journal, September 6, 1948.
5. Prof. C. N. Vakil, Free Press Journal, September 11, 1948.
6. Prof. C. N. Vakil, Bombay Chronicle.
7. Prof. C. N. Vakil, at the meeting of India Merchants Chamber.
8. Prof. Dantwala, Free Press Journal, September 1, 1948.
9. Prof. Gheewala, Free Press Journal, September 11, 1948.
