MR. RUSSELL AND THE RECONSTRUCTION OF SOCIETY
489
once served as a basic philosophy of life, probably with justification. The 
economic life and the philosophic outlook of a society are more intimately 
connected than is commonly supposed11 and chipped off its exaggerations, 
the Economical Interpretation of History holds true. This time-honoured 
complaint of the moralists against “love of money” is only a part of their 
general complaint against the goods of the world and finds its justification 
in the economic circumstances which gave rise to this particular belief. 
Bearing this in mind, it becomes easy to understand why the philosophy 
of sour grapes, of the have-nots, is the most human of all beliefs and why 
it so largely pervades our values about things which we can and things 
which we cannot possess in spite of our efforts to have them. When we 
cannot have a thing we argue that it is not worth having. There is thus 
a genuine difference between the outlooks of the “haves” and the “have-
nots” towards worldly goods as there is between the religions of the down-
cast and the successful. Each one in obedience to its profoundly moral 
nature—moral even in its immorality in that it seeks justification for 
everything it does—idealises its own attitude. At a time when the whole 
world was living in “pain economy” as did the ancient world and when 
the productivity of human labour was extremely low and when no efforts 
could augment its return, in short, when the whole world was living in 
poverty it is but natural that moralists should have preached the gospel of 
poverty and renunciation of worldly pleasures only because they were not 
to be had. The belief of a society of “pain economy” is that a thing must 
be bad if it cannot be had just as a society of “pleasure economy” addicted 
to “ conspicuous consumption “ believes that a thing must be nasty if it 
is cheap. Neither does the re-statement of the evils of “love of money” by 
Mr. Russell add any philosophic weight to its historic value. The 
misconception arises from the fact that he criticises the love of money 
without inquiring into the purpose of it. In a healthy mind, it may be 
urged, there is no such thing as a love of money in the abstract. Love of 
money is always for something and it is the purpose embodied in that “for 
something” that will endow it with credit or cover it with shame. Having 
regard to this, there can be no “dead uniformity of character” among the 
individual for, though actuated by love of money, their purposes on different 
occasions are likely to be different. Thus even love of money as a pursuit 
may result in a variety of character.
If Mr. Russell’s thesis is shaky when looked at from the production 
side of our life, it entirely falls to the ground when looked at from the 
consumption side. Really to prove that human nature mutilates itself by 
feeding, exclusively, some one appetite we shall have to find our support 
by scrutinizing not the production but the consumption side of life. Now
11. Cf James Bonar “Philosophy in its Relation to Political Economy”, more particularly, 
Achille Lorla, “Economic Foundations of Society”.
