148
 
DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES
CHAPTER 5
THE NORTH VERSUS THE SOUTH
What the Commission has created is not a mere disparity between the 
States by leaving U.P. and Bihar as they are, by adding to them a new 
and a bigger Madhya Pradesh with Rajasthan it creates a new problem 
of North versus South.
The North is Hindi speaking. The South is non-Hindi speaking. Most 
people do not know what is the size of the Hindi-speaking population. It 
is as much as 48 per cent of the total population of India. Fixing one’s 
eye on this fact one cannot fail to say that the Commission’s effort will 
result in the consolidation of the North and the balkanization of the South.
Can the South tolerate the dominance of the North?
It may now not be a breach of a secret if I revealed to the public what 
happened in the Congress Party meeting when the Draft Constitution of 
India was being considered, on the issue of adopting Hindi as the national 
language. There was no article which proved more controversial than 
Article 115 which deals with the question. No article produced more 
opposition. No article, more heat. After a prolonged discussion when 
the question was put, the vote was 78 against 78. The tie could not 
be resolved. After a long time when the question was put to the Party 
meeting the result was 77 against 78 for Hindi. Hindi won its place as a 
national language by one vote. I am stating these facts from my personal 
knowledge. As Chairman of the Drafting Committee I had naturally entry 
to the Congress Party enclosure.
These facts reveal how much the South dislikes the North. This 
dislike may grow into hatred if the North remains consolidated and the 
South becomes disintegrated and if the North continues to exercise a 
disproportionate influence on the politics of India (See Map 1).
To allow one State to have such preponderating influence in the Centre 
is a dangerous thing.
Mr. Pannikar has referred to this aspect of the case. In his dissenting 
minute he says :
“The consequence of the present imbalance, caused by the denial of the 
federal principal of equality of units, has been to create feelings of distrust and 
resentment in all the States outside Uttar Pradesh. Not only in the Southern 
States but also in the Punjab, Bengal and elsewhere the view was generally 
expressed before the Commission that the present structure of government 
led to the dominance of Uttar Pradesh in all-India matters. The existence of 
this feeling will hardly be denied by anyone. That it will be a danger to our 
unity, if such feelings are allowed to exist and remedies are not sought and 
found now, will also not be denied.”
