291
 
FEDERATION VERSUS FREEDOM
arising out of the necessities of a federal constitution. All I want you to note 
is that this is a very significant change.
The next thing to note about the Federal Executive is that although the 
Governor-General is the Executive Authority for the Federation, there are 
conditions laid down for the exercise of his powers as the Federal Executive. 
The constitution divides the matters falling within his executive authority into 
four classes and prescribes how he is to exercise his executive authority in 
respect of each of these four classes. In certain matters the Governor-General 
(1) is to act in his own discretion ; (2) In certain matters he is to act on the 
advice of his Ministers ; (3) in certain matters he is to act after consultation 
with his Ministers, and (4) in certain matters he is to act according to his 
individual judgment. A word may be said as to the de jure connotation that 
underlies these four cases of the exercise of the executive authority by the 
Governor-General. The best way to begin to explain this de jure connotation 
is to begin by explaining what is meant by “acting on the advice of his 
ministers.” This means, in those matters the government is really carried 
on, on the authority of the Ministers and only in the name of the Governor-
General. To put the same thing differently, the advice of the Ministers is 
binding on the Governor-General and he cannot differ from their advice. 
With regard to the matters where the Governor-General is allowed “to act 
in his discretion” what is meant is that the Government is not only carried 
on in the name of the Governor-General, but is also carried on the authority 
of the Governor-General. That means that there can be no intervention or 
interference by the Ministers at any stage. The Ministers have no right to 
tender any advice and the Governor-General is not bound to seek their advice ; 
or to make it concrete, the files with regard to these matters need not go to 
the Ministers at all. “Acting in his individual judgment” means that while the 
matter is within the advisory jurisdiction of the Minister, the Minister has 
no final authority to decide. The final authority to decide is the Governor-
General. The distinction between “in his discretion” and “in his individual 
judgment” is this that while in regard to matters falling “in his discretion” 
the Ministers have no right to tender advice to the Governor-General, the 
Ministers have a right to tender advice when the matter is one which falls 
under “his individual judgment”. To put it differently in regard to matters 
which are subject to his individual judgment the Governor-General is bound 
to receive advice from his ministers but is not bound to follow their advice. 
He may consider their advice, but may act otherwise and differently from the 
advice given by the Ministers. But in respect of matters which are subject 
to his discretion he is not bound even to receive the advice of his Ministers. 
The phrase “after consultation” is a mere matter of procedure. The authority 
in such matter vests in the Governor-General. All that is required is that 
he should take into account the wishes of the Ministers. Cases relating to
