286
 
DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES
there is nothing beyond or behind, to which his authority is referable. 
Can this be said of the Indian Federation ? Is the Crown the ultimate 
source of authority exercised by the Federation ? Is there nothing beyond 
or behind the Crown to which this authority needs to be referred ? The 
answer to this question is that only for a part of the authority of the 
Federation the Crown is the ultimate source and that for remaining part 
the Crown is not the ultimate source.
That this is the true state of affairs is clear from the terms of the 
Instrument of Accession. I quote the following from the draft Instruments :—
“Whereas proposals for the establishment of a Federation of India 
comprising such Indian States as may accede thereto and the Provinces 
of British India constituted as Autonomous Provinces have been discussed 
between representatives of His Majesty’s Government of the Parliament of 
the United Kingdom, of British India and of the Rulers of the Indian States;
And Whereas those proposals contemplated that the Federation of India 
should be constituted by an Act of the Parliament of the United Kingdom 
and by the accession of Indian States ;
And Whereas provision for the constitution of a Federation of India has 
now been made in the Government of India Act, 1935 ;
And Whereas that Act provided that the Federation shall not be established 
until such date as His Majesty may, by proclamation, declare, and such 
declaration cannot be made until the requisite number of Indian States have 
acceded to the Federation ;
And Whereas the said Act cannot apply to any of my territories save 
by virtue of my consent and concurrence signified by my accession to the 
Federation;
Now, therefore, I (insert full name and title), Ruler of (insert name of 
State), in the exercise of my sovereignty in and over my said State for 
the purpose of co-operating in the furtherance of the interests and welfare 
of India by uniting in a Federation under the Crown by the name of the 
Federation of India with Provinces called Governors’ Provinces and with 
the Provinces called Chief Commissioners’ Provinces and with the Rulers of 
other Indian States do hereby execute this my Instrument of Accession, and 
hereby declare that subject to His Majesty’s acceptance of this Instrument, 
I accede to the Federation of India as established under the Government 
of India Act, 1935.”
This is a very important feature of the Indian Federation. What has brought 
about this difference between the Indian Federation and the Canadian and 
Australian Federation ? For what part is the Crown the ultimate source 
and for what part is it not? To understand these questions you must take
