STATES AND MINORITIES
425
was due to the fact that at the time when the Poona Pact was made no 
community was guaranteed by Law a specific quantum of representation in 
Executive, Secondly, the representation of the communities in the Executive 
was left to a convention which the Governor by his instrument of instructions 
was required to see observed. Experience has shown that the quantum of 
representation of the Scheduled Castes in the Executive should now be fixed.
PART I—CLAUSE 3
This is not a new demand. Clause 8 of the Poona Pact guarantees to the 
Scheduled Castes fair representation in Public Services. It does not, however, 
define the quantum of representation. The demand has been admitted by the 
Government of India as legitimate and even the quantum of representation 
has been defined. All that remains is to give it a statutory basis.
PART II—CLAUSE 1
This is not a new demand. Clause 9 of Poona Pact guarantees that an 
adequate sum shall be earmarked for the education of the Scheduled Castes. 
It does not define the quantum. All that the demand does is to define the 
quantum of liability the State should take. In this connection reference may 
be made to Section 83 of the Government of India Act, 1935, which relates 
to the education of the Anglo-Indians and Europeans and to the grants made 
to the Aligarh and Benaras Hindu Universities by the Central Government.
PART II—CLAUSE 2
This a new demand but is justified by circumstances. At present, the 
Hindus live in the village and the Untouchables live in the Ghettoes. The 
object is to free the Untouchables from the thraldom of the Hindus. So long 
as the present arrangement continues it is impossible for the Untouchables 
either to free themselves from the yoke of the Hindus or to get rid of their 
Untouchability. It is the close knit association of the Untouchables with the 
Hindus living in the same villages which marks them out as Untouchables 
and which enables the Hindus to identify them as being Untouchables. 
India is admittedly a land of villages and so long as the village system 
provides an easy method of marking out and identifying the Untouchables, 
the Untouchable has no escape from Untouchability. It is the system of 
the Village plus the Ghetto which perpetuates Untouchability and the 
Untouchables therefore demand that the nexus should be broken and the 
Untouchables who are as a matter of fact socially separate should be made 
separate geographically and territorially also, and be settled into separate 
villages exclusively of Untouchables in which the distinction of the high and 
the low and of Touchable and Untouchable will find no place.
The second reason for demanding separate settlements arises out of the 
economic position of the Untouchables in the villages. That their condition 
is most pitiable no one will deny. They are a body of landless labourers
