352
 
DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES
time where the old age ends and the new begins. The old age was the 
age of Ranade, Agarkar, Tilak, Gokhale, Wachha, Sic Pherozeshah Mehta, 
Surendranath Bannerjee. The new age is the age of Mr. Gandhi and this 
generation is said to be Gandhi generation. As one who knows something of 
the old age and also something of the new I see some very definite marks 
of difference between the two. The type of leadership has undergone a 
profound change. In the age of Ranade the leaders struggled to modernize 
India. In the age of Gandhi the leaders are making her a living specimen 
of antiquity. In the age of Ranade leaders depended upon experience as 
a corrective method of their thoughts and their deeds. The leaders of the 
present age depend upon their inner voice as their guide. Not only is there 
a difference in their mental make up there is a difference even in their view 
point regarding external appearance. The leaders of the old age took care 
to be well clad while the leaders of the present age take pride in being half 
clad. The leaders of the Gandhi age are of course aware of these differences. 
But far from blushing for their views and their appearance they claim 
that the India of Gandhi is superior to India of Ranade. They say that the 
age of Mr. Gandhi is an agitated and an expectant age, which the age of 
Mr. Ranade was not.
Those who have lived both in the age of Ranade and the age of Gandhi 
will admit that there is this difference between the two. At the same time 
they will be able to insist that if the India of Ranade was less agitated it was 
more honest and that if it was less expectant it was more enlightened. The 
age of Ranade was an age in which men and women did engage themselves 
seriously in studying and examining the facts of their life, and what is 
more important is that in the face of the opposition of the orthodox mass 
they tried to mould their lives and their character in accordance with the 
light they found as a result of their research. In the age of Ranade there 
was not the same divorce between a politician and a student which one 
sees in the Gandhi age. In the age of Ranade a politician, who was not a 
student, was treated as an intolerable nuisance, if not a danger. In the age 
of Mr. Gandhi learning, if it is not despised, is certainly not deemed to be 
a necessary qualification of a politician.
To my mind there is no doubt that this Gandhi age is the dark age of 
India. It is an age in which people instead of looking for their ideals in 
the future are returning to antiquity. It is an age in which people have 
ceased to think for themselves and as they have ceased to think they 
have ceased to read and examine the facts of their lives. The fate of an 
ignorant democracy which refuses to follow the way shown by learning 
and experience and chooses to grope in the dark paths of the mystics and 
the megalomaniacs is a sad thing to contemplate. Such an age I thought 
needed something more than a mere descriptive sketch of the Federal 
Scheme, It needed a treatment which was complete though not exhaustive
