351
 
FEDERATION VERSUS FREEDOM
whom the settlement should be made but what were to be the terms of 
that settlement. As to the terms of the settlement, Mr. Gandhi was quite 
unequal to the task. When he went to London he had forgotten that he 
would have before him not those who go to him to obtain his advice and 
return with his blessings but persons who would treat him as a lawyer 
treats a witness in the box. Mr. Gandhi also forgot that he was going to a 
political conference. He went there as though he was going to a Vaishnava 
Shrine singing the Narsi Mehta’s Songs. When I think of the whole affair I 
am wondering if any nation had ever sent a representative to negotiate the 
terms of a national settlement who was more unfit than Mr. Gandhi. How 
unfit Mr. Gandhi was to negotiate a settlement becomes evident when one 
realizes that this Ambassador of India was ready to return to India with 
only Provincial Autonomy when as a matter of fact he was sent to negotiate 
on the basis of Independence. No man has brought greater disasters to the, 
interests of India than did Mr. Gandhi at the Round Table Conference. Less 
one speaks of him the better.
How far each of these interests feel satisfied with the Federal Scheme 
such as it is, it is not for me to say. The question one may however ask 
is, are these the only points of view that must be taken into consideration 
in deciding as to what we shall do with this Federation ? I protest that 
there are other points of view besides those mentioned above which-must 
receive attention. There is the point of view of the Free man. There is also 
the point of view of the Poor man. What have they to say of Federation ? 
The Federation does not seem to take any account of them. Yet they are 
the people who are most deeply concerned. Can the free man hope that the 
Federal Constitution will not be a menace to his freedom? Can the poor 
man feel that the constitution will enable him to have old values revalued, 
to have vested rights devested? I have no doubt that this Federation if it 
comes into being will be a standing menace to the free man and an obstacle 
in the way of the poor man. What freedom can there be when you are made 
subject to the autocracy of the Princes? What economic betterment can there 
be when you get Second Chambers with vested rights entrenched in Ml and 
when legislation affecting property is subject to sanction by the Government 
both before introducing and after it has passed ?
XI
CONCLUSION
I have perhaps detained you longer than I should have done. You will 
allow that it is not altogether my fault. The vastness of the subject is one 
reason for the length of this address.
I must, however, confess that there is also another reason which has 
persuaded me not to cut too short. We are standing today at the point of
