328
 
DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES
That means that the Ministers, will have no right to give any advice in the 
matter of the nomination of the Princes’ Representatives and the Legislature 
will have no right to criticise it. They will be under the control of the 
Viceroy as distinct from the Governor-General. Secondly, this official block 
of the Princes is not a small block. In the Lower House a party which has 
187 seats can command a majority. In the Upper Chamber a party which 
has 130 seats can command a majority. In the Lower House the Princes 
have 125 seats. All that they need is a group of 62 to make a majority. 
In the Upper Chamber they have 104 ; all that they need is 26. All this 
vast strength the Executive can command. How can such a Legislature be 
independent ? The Reserved half can control the Transferred half with this 
strength in its possession.
How will the representatives of British India behave ? I cannot make any 
positive statement. But I like it to be borne in mind that in some States 
there is no such thing as a regular budget and there is no such thing as 
independent audit and accounts. It would not be difficult for the Princes to 
purchase support from British India representatives. Politics is a dirty game 
and British India politicians cannot all be presumed to be beyond corruption 
and when purchases can be made without discovery the danger is very real.
Look at the Federal Scheme any way you like and analyze it as you may 
its provisions relating to responsibility, you will see that of real responsibility 
there is none.
VII
THE BANE OF THE FEDERAL SCHEME
There is no one who does not recognize that this Scheme for an All Indian 
Federation is full of defects. A difference of opinion arises only when the 
question is asked what shall we do about it. The answers given to this 
question by prominent Indians from time to time disclose that broadly 
speaking, there are two quite different attitudes to this Federation. There 
is the attitude of those who think that bad as it is, we should accept the 
Federation and work it so as to derive whatever good it can yield. On the 
other hand, there is the attitude of those who think that certain changes 
must be made in the Constitution of the Federation before it can be accepted 
and worked. It is agreeable to find that both the Congress as well as the 
Liberal Federation are one on this issue. Both have declared that certain 
changes must be made before they will accept to work the Federation.
That this Federation is not acceptable to a large majority of the Indian 
people is beyond question. The question is in what respects should we 
require the Constitution to be amended ? What are the changes which we 
should demand ? We may take as our starting point the resolutions passed 
by the Congress and the Liberal Federation relating to this question.
