339
 
FEDERATION VERSUS FREEDOM
would be in a stronger position. After the Federation, Parliament would be in 
a position to say that it is willing to grant the demand for change but that 
its authority to change is limited and that before making any demand for 
change. Indians should obtain the consent of the Princes. There is nothing 
to prevent Parliament from taking this stand.
What reply would Indians be able to give if they once accept the Federation 
and thereby admit the implications underlying it ?
VIII
THE FATALITY OF FEDERATION
What shall we do with the Indian States ? That is a question that is 
often asked. Some people with Republican faith in them desire their total 
abolition. Those who do not care for forms of Government will reject this 
view. But even they must abide by the consideration that what works best 
is best. Can the Indian States be said to work best ? I do not know that 
there is anybody, who will be prepared to give an affirmative answer, at 
any rate an affirmative answer which will apply to all States. The internal 
administration of the States is a bye-word for mismanagement and mal-
administration. Very few States will escape this charge.
The people are always asking as to why there should be this mismanagement 
and maladministration in the States. The usual answer is that it is the 
consequence of Personal Rule. Everywhere the demand made is that Personal 
Rule should be replaced by Popular Government. I have grave doubts about 
the efficacy of this demand. I do not think that in a large majority of cases 
the substitution of Popular Government will be any cure for the ills of the 
State subjects. For, I am sure that the evils arise as much from the misrule 
of the Ruler as they arise from want of resources. Few have any idea as to 
how scanty are the resources of the Indian States.
Let me give you a few facts. Out of the total of 627 States there are 
only ten with an annual revenue above 1 crore. Of these ten, five have just 
about a crore, three have between 2 and 2¼ crores. One has just about 3¼ 
crores and only one has a revenue just about 8 crores. There are nine with a 
revenue ranging between 1 crore and 50 lakhs. About twelve have a revenue 
ranging between 50 to 25 lakhs. Thirty have a revenue varying between 
25 lakhs and 10 lakhs. The rest of the 566 have an annual revenue which 
is less than 10 lakhs. This does not, however, give an idea of how small 
are some of the States which fall below 10 lakhs. A few illustrations may 
therefore be given. Among these 565 States there is one with a revenue of 
Rs. 500 and a population of 206 souls. Another with a revenue of Rs. 165 
and a population of 125 : another with a revenue of Rs. 136 and a population 
of 239, another with a revenue of 128 and a population of 147 and another
