348
 
DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES
India can tolerate those forms of Government however antiquated they 
may be. But the Federation makes them a factor and a powerful factor 
and British India cannot remain indifferent to them. Indeed the forging 
of the Federation will compel British India to launch a compaign in sheer 
self-interest for revolutionising the forms of Government prevalent in the 
Indian States.
This will be the inevitable result of this Federation. Is this a consummation 
which the States devoutly wish for ? This is a question they will have to 
consider.
Does British India welcome this prospect ? Speaking for myself I will 
not. It would be impossible to wage war on so vast a front. The States are 
too numerous to allow concentrated attack. The States being a part of the 
structure, you cannot attack them and justify your attack as a Constitutional 
Act. Secondly, why put yourself in this difficulty ? Sometimes it turns out 
that a man thinks that he is buying property when as a matter of fact he is 
buying litigation. For British India to accept this Federation is like buying 
trouble. Thirdly, this Constitution is a settlement from which Dominion 
Status is most rigidly excluded not only for the present but also for the 
future as well.
Looked at from any point of view, the wisest course seems to me that 
leaving the States where they are, British India should proceed on its own 
evolution and Federation for itself.
X
FEDERATION FROM DIFFERENT POINTS OF VIEW
Different people are looking at this Federation from different points of 
view. There is the point of view of the Princes. There is the point of view 
of the Hindus and the Muslims and the Congress. There is also the point 
of view of the Merchant and the Trader. The point of view of each one of 
these is of course the result of their particular interests.
What is the interest of the Princes in this Federation? To understand 
the motives of the Princes you must go back to the Butler Committee. The 
Princes had been complaining of the encroachment of the Political Department 
of the Government of India upon their treaty rights under the Doctrine of 
Paramountcy. The Princes were insisting that the Political Department had 
no greater right against the States except those that were given by the 
treaties subsisting between them and the British Government. The Political 
Department on the other hand claimed that in addition to the rights referable 
to the treaties, the Crown had also rights which were referable to political 
usages and customs. To adjudicate upon this dispute, the Secretary of State 
agreed to appoint the Butler Committee. The Princes had hoped that the 
Butler Committee would accept their contentions and limit the scope of
