266
 
DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES
38. At this stage we must consider the argument against communal 
representation. The first argument raised by the authors of the report is to 
the effect “that the history of self-government among the nations who have 
developed it is decisively against” communal representation. But on an earlier 
page the authors say that the difference of caste and creeds must be taken 
“into account as presenting a feature of Indian Society which is out of harmony 
with the ideas on which elsewhere in the world representative institutions 
rest” (page 97). In writing the former the later analysis of the situation 
must have vanished from their minds, else we must say that the authors 
could hold two opposing views at the same time. Presented in juxtaposition, 
the authors must be expected to agree to communal representation on the 
score of an exceptional remedy required to meet an exceptional situation.
39. Another and chief argument against communal representation is that 
it will perpetuate social divisions. The fun of it is that those who uphold the 
social divisions are the loudest in their expression of this adverse argument. 
The committee will please note that those who are the opponents of communal 
representation on this score are also the staunchest opponents of Mr. Patel’s 
Inter-Caste Marriage Bill as a caste-breaking bill. The sincerity of those 
who bring forward this argument is seriously to be doubted. But as even 
the authors of the report have put it as a second count against communal 
representation, this particular argument must be met if possible.
Does communal representation perpetuate social divisions ? If you look 
upon communal representation as making electoral Colleges of social divisions, 
the criticism may be said to be valid. This is true only if it is presupposed 
that the divisions are no real divisions and that they don’t matter. This is 
as false a pre-supposition as that of inviting India which is made when it 
is said that Englishmen are unsocial. Communal Representation is a device 
to ward off the evil effects of the divisions. To those who, while agreeing 
to this particular benefit of communal representation, object to it on the 
score that it perpetuates the divisions it can be shown that there is another 
perspective from which it can be said that communal representation instead 
of perpetuating the social divisions is one of the ways of dissolving them.
40. While communal electorates will be co-terminous with social divisions 
their chief effect will be to bring together men from diverse castes who would 
not otherwise mix together into the Legislative Council. The Legislative 
Council will thus become a new cycle of participation in which the 
representatives of various castes who were erstwhile isolated and therefore 
anti-social will be thrown into an associated life. An active participation 
in an associated life, in its turn, will not leave unaffected the dispositions 
and attitudes of those who participate. A caste or a religious group to-day 
is a certain attitude. So long as each caste or a group remains isolated its 
attitude remains fossilized. But the moment the several castes and groups
