 
MAHARASHTRA AS A LINGUISTIC PROVINCE
117
granted to Nima, and when he goes about to buy any land he may be 
acquainted with that small incumbrance thereon.
“The 4th article is indeed a privilege but no more than Girdhar, the 
Moody and some others have, which does not in the least exempt them 
from the hands of the law or justice, but does only ask that justice be 
done respectfully, which he need not doubt of, and for matter of differences 
among themselves there is already his Honour’s patent authorising them 
to decide such things.
“As to the 5th, the great anchorage of a rupee per ton is wholly taken 
off. There remains only a small one of a rupee for every 100 tons, which is 
so inconsiderable a matter that we do not believe we will stick at it. If he 
does, it will amount but to a small matter being only for his own vessels 
that the Company may easily allow it.
“The 6th if we rightly apprehend it, is no more than what all people 
enjoy, who are so far from paying custom at exportation of their own goods 
that they pay none for what goods they buy. But if he intends his goods 
must pay no custom at landing nor none at exportation of what he cannot 
sell, it will be so great a loss to the Company, they having farmed out 
the customs for two years, that the benefit of his settling here, will, we 
believe, not countervail it, till it comes into the Company’s hands again.
“As to the 7th, our law is such that if a person be indebted to several 
men, whosoever gets a judgment first in Court will be paid his full debt, but 
no man can be aggrieved at that, nor can any creditor have any pretence 
to what is once paid, and when judgment is given it is already paid in law, 
so that he is no longer proprietor of it. But when a person is indebted to 
two men and the first sues him and upon that the second comes in and 
sues him too, with what justice can we pay all the debtor’s estate to the 
second creditor. Only of this he may be assured that all justice shall be 
done him with speed according to our law and the party forced to pay the 
full debt, if able, and lie in prison for the rest till he pleases to release 
him, which we suppose may well content him.
“As to the 8th, in case of war all persons of quality have liberty to repair 
to the castle and secure their money and other things of value. Nor that 
I suppose he intends to fill up the castle with gurf (coarse) goods ; but for 
money, jewels household stuff, cloth goods of value, that take up small 
room, he may bring what he pleases and may have a warehouse apart 
allotted for himself and family.
“The 9th and 10th we may join together, they being only to fill up the 
number. They are plain optics to show the nature of those they live under 
which, when they have experimented our Government, themselves will 
laugh at us, enjoying more freedom than the very articles demand, for
