STATES AND MINORITIES
393
(iii) The State in which a citizen wishes to settle may not impose any 
special charge upon him in respect of such settlement other than the charge 
imposed upon its own inhabitants. The maximum fees chargeable in respect 
of permits for settlement shall be determined by laws made by the Union 
Legislature.
(iv) The permission to settle may be refused or withdrawn by a State 
from persons—
 (a) who have been habitual criminals ;
 (b) whose intention to settle is to alter the communal balance of the 
State ;
 (c) who cannot prove to the satisfaction of the State in which they wish 
to settle that they have an assured means of subsistence and who 
are likely to become or have become a permanent burden upon public 
charity;
 (d) whose State of origin refuses to provide adequate assistance for them 
when requested to do so,
(v) Permission to settle may be made conditional upon the applicant being 
capable of work and not having been a permanent charge upon public charity 
in the place of his origin, and able to give security against unemployment.
(vi) Every expulsion must be confirmed by the Union Government.
(vii) Union Legislature shall define the difference between settlement and 
residence and at the same time, prescribe regulations governing the political 
and civil rights of persons during their residence.
8. The Union Government shall guarantee protection against persecution 
of a community as well as against internal disorder or violence arising in 
any part of India.
9. Subjecting a person to forced labour or to involuntary servitude shall 
be an offence.
10. The right of the people to be secure in their persons, houses, papers 
and effects against unreasonable searches and seizures, shall not be violated, 
and no warrants shall issue, but upon probable cause, supported by oath or 
affirmation, and particularly describing the place to be searched, and the 
persons or things to be seized.
11. The right of a citizen to vote shall not be denied or abridged on any 
account other than immaturity, imprisonment and insanity.
12. No law shall be made abridging the freedom of Speech, of the Press, 
of Association and of Assembly except for consideration of public order and 
morality.
