122
 
DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES
Provinces also has not been made clear by them. Or, is it that they 
believed in the principle of Linguistic Provinces but hurried to disavow 
it when they realized that the admission of the principle involves the 
surrender of Bombay to Maharashtra. It is perhaps one of these cases 
where a person not finding argument limited to his purpose is forced to 
resort to an argument which proves more than he is anxious to allow. 
I am, however, prepared to examine the substance of their argument.
48. Prof. Dantwala relies upon Lord Acton and quotes the following 
passage from his Essay on Nationality printed in his well-known book 
The History of Freedom and Other Essays in support of his own view 
against Linguistic Provinces. The quotation reads as follows :
“The combination of various nations in one State is a necessary condition 
of civilized life as the combination of men in society.”
49. I am sorry to say that this quotation completely misrepresents 
Lord Acton. The quotation is only a few opening lines of a big passage. 
The full passage reads as follows :
“The combination of different nations in one State is as necessary a condition 
of civilized life as the combination of men in society. Inferior races are raised 
by living in political union with races intellectually superior. Exhausting and 
decaying nations are revived by the contact of younger vitality. Nations in 
which the elements of organization and the capacity for Government have 
been lost, either through the demoralizing influence of despotism or the 
disintegrating action of democracy, are restored and educated a new under 
the discipline of a stronger and less corrupted race. This fertilizing and 
regenerating process can only be obtained by living under one Government. 
It is in the cauldron of the State that the fusion takes place by which the 
vigour, the knowledge and the capacity of one portion of mankind may be 
communicated to another.’’
50. Why Prof. Dantwala left out the rest of the passage, it is difficult to 
understand. I am not suggesting that it is a deliberate case of suppresio 
veri and suggestio falsi. The fact is that it does misrepresent Lord Acton. 
Why has the Professor relied upon this passage, I do not understand. It 
is quite obvious that if the inferior races are placed in common with the 
superior races, the inferior races may improve. But the question is, who is 
inferior or who is superior. Are the Gujarathis inferior to Maharashtrians? 
Or are the Maharashtrians inferior to Gujarathis ? Secondly, what is the 
channel of cummunion between Gujarathis and Maharashtrians which 
can assure the fusion of the two ? Prof. Dantwala has not considered 
the question. He found a sentence in Lord Acton’s Essay and jumped at 
it for he could find nothing else to support his case. The point is that 
there is nothing in the passage which has any relevance to the principle 
involved in the question of Linguistic Province.
