214
 
DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES
Carlyle the apostle of Hero Worship had a test of his own. He laid it 
down in the following terms :
“But of great man especially, of him I will venture to assert that it is 
incredible he should have been other than true. It seems to me the primary 
foundation of him, this... No man adequate to do anything, but is first of all 
in right earnest about it; what I call a sincere man. I should say sincerity, 
a deep, great genuine sincerity, is the first characteristic of all men in any 
way heroic.”
Carlyle was of course particular in defining his test of sincerity in 
precise terms, and in doing so he warned his readers by defining what 
his idea of sincerity was—
“Not the sincerity that calls itself sincere : Ah no,” he said, “that is a 
very poor matter indeed ; — a shallow, braggart, conscious sincerity ; oftenest 
self-conceit mainly. The great man’s sincerity is of the kind he cannot speak 
of, is not conscious of : Nay, I suppose, he is conscious rather of insincerity ; 
for what man can walk accurately by the law of truth for one day ? No, the 
great man does not boast himself sincere, far from that; perhaps does not 
ask himself if he is so : I would say rather, his sincerity does not depend 
on himself ; he cannot help being sincere!”
Lord Rosebery proposed another test when dealing with Napoleon—who 
was as great an Administrator as a General. In answering the question, 
Was Napoleon Great ? Rosebery used the following language :
“If by ‘great’ be intended the combination of moral qualities with those of 
intellect, great be certainly was not. But that he was great in the sense of 
being extraordinary and supreme we can have no doubt. If greatness stands 
for natural power, for predominance, for something human beyond humanity, 
then Napoleon was assuredly great. Besides that indefinable spark which 
we call genius, he represents a combination of intellect and energy which 
has never perhaps been equalled, never certainly surpassed.”
There is a third test, suggested by the philosophers or, to be more 
accurate, by those who believe in divine guidance of human affairs. They 
have a different conception of what is a great man. To summarise the 
summary of their view, as given by Rosebery, a great man is launched 
into the world, as a great natural or supernatural force, as a scourge 
and a scavenger boon to cleanse society and lead it on to the right path 
who is engaged in a vast operation, partly positive, mainly negative, but 
all relating to social regeneration.
Which of these is the true test ? In my judgment all are partial and none 
is complete. Sincerity must be the test of a great man. Clemenceau once said 
that most statesmen are rogues. Statesmen are not necessarily great men,
