300
 
DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES
existence. While the Federation exists there is no right to secede. But that 
is not the real question. The real question is, will the federation continue 
even when the Act is changed ? In other words the question is, is this a 
perpetual Union with no right to secede or, is this a mere alliance with a 
right to break away? In my opinion the Indian Federation is not a perpetual 
union and that the Indian States have a right to secede. In this respect the 
constitution of the United States and this Indian Federation stand in clear 
contrast. The constitution of the United States says nothing as to the right 
of secession. This omission was interpreted in two different ways. Some said 
that it was not granted because it was copy recognized. Others said it was 
not excluded because it was not negatived. It was this controversy over the 
question namely whether the right of secession was excluded because it was 
not recognized which led to the Civil War of 1861. The Civil War settled 
two important principles : (1) No State has a right to declare an Act of the 
Federal Government invalid ; (2) No State has a right to secede from the 
Union. In the Indian Federation it would be unnecessary to go to war for 
establishing the right to secession because the Constitution recognizes the 
right of the Indian States to secede from the Indian Federation if certain 
eventualities occur. What is a perpetual Union and what is only a compact 
is made nowhere so clear as by Blackstone in his analysis of the nature of 
the Union between England and Scotland. To use his language the Indian 
Federation is not an incorporate Union because in a Union the two contracting 
States are totally annihilated without any power of revival. The Indian 
Federation is an alliance between two contracting parties, the Crown and 
the Indian States, in which neither is annihilated but each reserves a right 
to original Status if a breach of condition occurs. The Constitution of the 
United States originated in a compact but resulted in a union. The Indian 
Federation originates in a compact and continues as a compact. That the 
Indian Federation has none of the marks of a Union but on the other hand 
it has all the marks of a compact is beyond dispute. The distinguishing 
marks of a Union were well described by Daniel Webster, when in one of 
his speeches on the American Constitution he said—
“ ...The constitution speaks of that political system which is established as ‘the 
Government of the United States’. Is it not doing a strange violence to languages 
to call a league or a compact between sovereign powers a Government ? The 
Government of a State is that organisation in which political power resides”.
“ ...The broad and clear difference between a government and a league 
or a compact is that a government is a body politic ; it has a will of its 
own ; and it possesses powers and faculties to execute its own purposes 
Every compact looks to some power to enforce its stipulations. Even 
in a compact between sovereign communities, there always exists this 
ultimate reference to a power to ensure its execution ; although in such
