288
 
DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES
it is because of this that the Crown’s Authority in and over this Federation 
is derivative in part.
This is the law as to the birth of the Federation. What is the law as 
to the growth of this Federation ? In other words what is the law as to 
change? The law as to change is contained in section 6(1)(a), Schedule II 
and section 6(5).
Section 6(1)(a) makes it clear that the accession by a Prince, effected 
through his Instrument of Accession, is “to the Federation as established 
by this Act.” Schedule II deals with future amendment of the Constitution. 
It declares what are the provisions in the Government of India Act an 
amendment of which will be deemed to affect the Instrument of Accession 
and what are the provisions an amendment of which will not affect the 
Instrument of Accession by the States.
Section 6(5) does two things. In the first place it provides that the 
Instrument of Accession shall be deemed to confer upon Parliament the 
right to amend these provisions which are declared by Schedule II as open 
to amendment without affecting the Instrument of Accession. In the second 
place it provides that although Parliament may amend a provision of the Act 
which is declared by Schedule II as open to amendment without affecting 
the Instrument of Accession such an amendment shall not bind the States 
unless it is accepted as binding by the State by a supplementary Instrument 
of Accession.
To sum up, the units of this Federation do not form one single whole 
with a common spring of action. The units are separate. They are just held 
together. For some purposes the position of the units cannot be altered at 
all. For some purposes alteration is permissible but such alteration cannot 
bind all the units alike. Some will be bound by it but some will not be 
unless they consent to be bound. In other words in this Federation there is 
no provision for growth. It is fixed. It cannot move. A change by evolution is 
not possible and where it is possible it is not binding unless it is accepted.
III
THE STRUCTURE OF THE FEDERATION
(a) The Federal Legislature
The Federal Legislature is a bicameral legislature. There is a Lower 
House which is spoken of as the Legislative Assembly and there is an Upper 
House which is called the Council of State. The composition of the two 
Chambers is a noteworthy feature. They are very small Chambers compared 
with other legislatures having regard to the population and the area as 
the total membership of the Federal Assembly is 375 and of the Council of 
State 260. These seats are divided in a certain proportion between British 
India and the Indian States. Of the 375 seats in the Federal Assembly 250
