478
 
DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES
Our remedy for the enlargement as for the consolidation of holdings as 
well as the preservation of consolidated holdings reduces itself to this: We 
prefer to cure agriculture by the reflex effects of industrialization. Lest this 
might be deemed visionary we proceed to give evidence in support of our 
view. How agriculture improves by the reflex effects of industrialization 
has been studied in the United States in the year 1883. We shall quote 
in extenso the summary given by the London Times:
“The statistician of the Agricultural Department of the United States has 
shown in a recent report that the value of farm lands decreases in exact 
proportion as the ratio of agriculture to other industries increases. That is, 
where all the labour is devoted to agriculture, the land is worth less than 
where only half of the people are farm labourers ; and where only a quarter 
of them are so engaged the farms and their product are still more valuable. It 
is, in fact, proved by statistics that diversified industries are of the greatest 
value to a Stale, and that the presence of a manufactory near a farm increases 
the value of the farm and its crops. It is further established that, dividing 
the United States into four sections or classes, with reference to the ratio of 
agricultural workers to the whole population, and putting those States having 
less than 30 per cent of agriculture and of agricultural labourers in the first 
class, all having over 30 and less than 50 in the second, those between 50 
and 70 in the third, and those having 70 or more in the fourth, the value 
of farms is in inverse ratio to the agricultural population, and that where 
as in the purely agricultural section, the fourth class, the value of farms 
per acre is only $ 5.28, in the next class it is $ 13.03, in the third $ 22.21, 
and in manufacturing districts $ 40.91. This shows an enormous advantage 
for a mixed district. Yet not only is the land more valuable the production 
per acre is greater, and the wages paid to farm hands larger. Manufactures 
and varied industries thus not only benefit the manufacturers, but are of 
equal benefit and advantage to the farmers as well.”
This will show that ours is a proven remedy. It can be laid 
down without fear of challenge that industrialization will foster the 
enlargement of holdings and that it will be the most effective barrier 
against sub-division and fragmentation. Agreeing in this, it may be 
observed that industrialization will not be a sufficient remedy for 
consolidation. That it will require direct remedies may be true. But 
it is also true that industrialization, though it may not bring about 
consolidation, will facilitate consolidation. It is an incontrovertible 
truth that so long as there is the premium on land consolidation will 
not be easy, no matter on how equitable principles it is proposed to 
be carried out. Is it a small service if industrialization lessens the 
premium as it inevitably must ? Certainly not. Consideration of another 
aspect of consolidation as well points to the same conclusion : That
