402
 
DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES
Clause 2
(1) The Scheduled Castes shall have minimum representation in the 
Executive—Union and State—and if there be a group 
Constitution then in the group Executive equal to the 
ratio of their population to the total population. Provided 
that no minority community is allowed to claim more 
than its population ratio.
(2) Weightage where it becomes necessary to reduce a huge majority to 
reasonable dimensions shall come out of the share of the majority community. 
In no case shall it be at the cost of another minority community,
(3) Weightage carved out from the share of the majority shall not be 
assigned to one community only But the same shall be divided among all 
minorities equally or in inverse proportion to :
 (i) their economic position.
 (ii) social status, and
 (iii) educational advance.
Clause 3
Right to Representation in the Services
(a) The quantum of representation of the Scheduled Castes in the Services 
shall be as follows :
 (i) In the Union Services.—In proportion to the ratio of their population 
to the total population in India or British India as the case may be.
 (ii) In the State and Group Services.—In proportion to their population 
in the State or Union.
 (iii) In the Municipal and Local Board Services.—In proportion to their 
population in the Municipal and Local Boards areas :
 
 Provided that no minority community is allowed to claim more than 
its population ratio of representation in the Services.
(b) Their right to representation in the Services shall not be curtailed 
except by conditions relating to minimum qualifications, education, age, etc.
(c) The conditions prescribed for entry in Services shall not abrogate any 
of the concessions given to the Scheduled Castes by the Government of India 
in their Resolutions of 1942 and 1945.
(d) The method of filling up the vacancies shall conform to the rules 
prescribed in the Government of India Resolutions of 1942 and 1946.
(e) On every Public Services Commission or a Committee constituted for 
filling vacancies, the Scheduled Castes shall have at least one representative.
PART II—SPECIAL RESPONSIBILITIES
That the United States of India shall undertake the following special 
responsibilities for the betterment of the Scheduled Castes :
Right to 
Representation in the 
Executive.
(For explanation, see 
pages 424-25)
Right to Representation 
in services.
(For explanation, see 
page 425)
Provisions for 
Higher Education
(For explanation, 
see page 425)
