488
 
DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES
capitalist; syndicalism would amalgamate the interests of producer 
and capitalists. Neither amalgamates all three, or makes the 
interests of those who direct industry quite identical with those of 
the community. Neither, therefore, would wholly prevent industrial 
strife or obviate the need of the State as arbitrator. But either would 
be better than the present system, and probably a mixture of both 
would cure most of the evils of industrialism as it exists now. It is 
surprising that, while men and women have struggled to achieve 
political democracy, so little has been done to introduce democracy in 
industry. I believe incalculable benefits might result from industrial 
democracy either on the co-operative model or with recognition of a 
trade or industry as a unit for purposes of Government, with some 
kind of Home Rule such as syndicalism aims at securing. There is 
no reason why all Governmental units should be geographical. The 
system was necessary in the past because of the slowness of means 
of communication, but it is not necessary now. By some such system 
many men might come to feel again a pride in their work and to 
find again that outlet for the creative impulse which is now denied 
to all but a fortunate few. Such a system requires the abolition of 
the land owner and the restriction of the Capitalist, but does not 
entail equality of earnings. And unlike Socialism, it is not a static 
or final system; it is hardly more than a frame-work for energy and 
initiative. It is only by some such method, I believe that the free 
growth of the individual can be reconciled with the huge technical 
organizations which have been rendered necessary by industrialism”.9
It is a common place criticism of the industrial system that 
it gives rise to compartmental ethics, dwarfs the personality 
and makes slaves of the workers. To obviate such a result Mr. 
Russell approaches with a cautious spirit, a breadth of outlook and 
philosophic grasp of the social effects of the Economic Institutions. 
I wish the same could be said of his analysis of the mental effects 
of property. On the other hand his discussion of this aspect of 
property is marked by certain misconceptions which it is necessary 
to expose.
The first misconception is embodied in a statement about 
the “love of money” in which he says “it leads men to mutilate 
their own nature from a mistaken theory of what constitutes 
success and to give admiration to enterprises which add nothing 
to human welfare. It promotes a dead uniformity of character 
and purpose, a diminution in the joy of life, and a stress and 
strain which leaves whole communities weary, discouraged, and 
disillusioned.”10 This is a sentiment that smacks of the antique and
9. Principles of Social Reconstruction, pp, 141-42.
10. Ibid,. p. 113.
