146
 
DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES
but he cannot be an Indian in the real sense of the word except in a 
geographical sense. If my suggestion is not accepted India will then cease 
to be India. It will be a collection of different nationalities engaged in 
rivalries and wars against one another.
God seems to have laid a heavy curse on India and Indians, saying ‘Ye 
Indians shall always remain divided and ye shall always be slaves !’ 
I was glad that India was separated from Pakistan. I was the philosopher, 
so to say, of Pakistan. I advocated partition because I felt that it was only 
by partition that Hindus would not only be independent but free. If India 
and Pakistan had remained united in one State Hindus though independent 
would have been at the mercy of the Muslims. A merely independent India 
would not have been a free India from the point of view of the Hindus. 
It would have been a Government of one country by two nations and of 
these two the Muslims without question would have been the ruling race 
notwithstanding Hindu Mahasabha and Jana Sangh. When the partition 
took place I felt that God was willing to lift his curse and let India be one, 
great and prosperous. But I fear that the curse may fall again. For I find 
that those who are advocating linguistic States have at heart the ideal of 
making the regional language their official language.
This will be a death knell to the idea of a United India. With regional 
languages as official languages the ideal to make India one United country 
and to make Indians, Indians first and Indians last, will vanish. I can do 
no more than to suggest a way out. It is for Indians to consider it.
CHAPTER 4
MUST THERE BE ONE STATE FOR ONE LANGUAGE ?
What does a linguistic State mean ?
It can mean one of two things. It can mean that all people speaking one 
language must be brought under the jurisdiction of one State. It can also 
mean that people speaking one language may be grouped under many States 
provided each State has under its jurisdiction people who are speaking one 
language. Which is the correct interpretation ?
The Commission took the view that the creation of one single State for 
all people speaking one and the same language was the only rule to be 
observed.
Let the reader have a look at map No. 1. He will at once note the 
disparity between the Northern and Southern States. This disparity is 
tremendous. It will be impossible for the small States to bear the weight 
of the big States.
How dangerous this disparity is, the Commission has not realized. Such 
disparity no doubt exists in the United States. But the mischief it might
