321
 
FEDERATION VERSUS FREEDOM
Further in the Legislative sphere, so far as it relates to the Concurrent 
List the States have obtained authority without any obligation. They are free 
to legislate and need not consider their own case in doing so because they 
are not bound, by the laws they make. Their conduct can be as irresponsible 
as they may choose to make it.
It is however an understatement to say that the States have only a right 
to influence administration and Legislation in British India. The truth is 
that the States can dominate British India because they can maintain in 
office a ministry in the Federal Government although it is defeated by a 
majority of the representatives of British India on a matter purely affecting 
India. This is because they have a right to vote upon any motion including 
a non-confidence motion irrespective of the question whether the motion 
relates to a matter which affects them or not If this does not vest control 
over British India in Indian States I wonder what will.
The injustice and anomaly of the States taking part in the discussions of 
the internal affairs of British India while the representatives of British India 
having no corresponding right to discuss the affairs of the States was sought 
to be remedied by limiting the rights of the States to discuss and vote upon 
such questions as did not relate to internal affairs of British India, but the 
Princes and their representatives have always been against such distinction 
being drawn and they insisted that on any matter on which the fate of the 
Ministry depended they must have the right to decide upon the future of 
that Government. The constitution has given effect to the point of view of 
the Princes and set aside the point of view of British India.
This comparison shows that the States are placed by law in a position 
to control the affairs of British India and by the same law British India is 
disabled from exercising any influence over the States. That this is the true 
state of facts must be admitted by all. In other words the Federal Scheme does 
not help, indeed hinders British India from setting up in motion processes 
which would result in the democratisation of the Indian States. On the 
other hand it helps the Indian States to destroy democracy in British India.
3. Federation and Responsibility
Let us examine the plea of Responsibility. From the stand-point of British 
India it is of more decisive importance than the two other pleas and must 
be scrutinized more carefully.
It cannot be denied that the Federation has some degree of responsibility. 
The question is what is the degree of that responsibility and whether within 
its sphere it is a responsibility which can be called real.
Let us ask, how much responsibility is there in this Federation ? To be 
able to answer this question, you should read sections 9 and 11 together,
