330
 
DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES
especially in the direction of (a) clearing up the position of the Princes and 
securing the subjects of States the right of election of States’ representatives, 
(b) doing away with the safeguards regarding the monetary policy and 
commercial discrimination, (c) introducing direct elections for the members 
of the Federal Assembly by the Provinces and (d) making Constitution 
sufficiently elastic so as to enable India to attain Dominion Status within 
a reasonable period of time.
The National Liberal Federation considers that the present position when 
there is an irresponsible Government in the Centre coupled with responsible 
Governments in the Provinces is altogether untenable and earnestly urges on 
Parliament to make immediate changes in the Federal part of the Constitution 
so as to make it generally acceptable.
The Federation is further of opinion that these modifications are essential 
for the successful working of the Federal Constitution.”
Should these changes demanded by the Congress or by the Liberal 
Federation suffice to alter the present attitude of rejection into one of 
acceptance of Federation? Speaking for myself I have no hesitation in saying 
that the changes asked for in these Resolutions even if they are made will not 
convert me. To my mind whether the British Parliament is prepared to alter 
this, that or the other detail of the Federal Scheme immediately is a very 
unimportant consideration. In the view I take of the matter the objections 
to the Federal Scheme will not be removed in the least even if the British 
Parliament will be ready to grant every one of the demands contained in 
these Resolutions. To me the fundamental question is whether this Federal 
Scheme is capable of so evolving that in the end India will reach her goal 
and it is from this point of view that I want you and every one interested 
to examine the Federal Scheme.
What is the goal of India’s political evolution? There does not seem to 
any fixity or definiteness about it. The Congress which claims to voice the 
political aspirations of the Indian people began with good Government as 
its goal. It moved from good Government to Self-Government or Responsible 
Government ; from Responsible Government to Dominion Status and from 
Dominion Status it advanced to Independence. There the Congress stopped 
for some time in a mood of self-examination. Then there was period of 
vaccilation. Now it seems to have come back to Dominion Status and we 
shall not be very wrong if we take that to be the goal of India according to 
the Congress. Now the question is, can the Federal Scheme blossom in due 
course into Dominion Status ?
Many Indians seem to think that the question of Dominion Status is 
a matter of gift which lies in the hands of the British Parliament. If the 
British Parliament were to make up its mind to grant it, nothing can stand
