STATES AND MINORITIES
431
Appendix III
DISADVANTAGES OF THE POONA PACT
1. The Poona Pact was intended to devise a method whereby the Scheduled 
Castes would be able to return to the Legislature representatives of their 
choice. This intention has been completely nullified as will be seen from 
the following series of statistics. The series have been constructed from the 
results of the last elections which took place in February 1946.
2. The statistical data is arranged in four series of tables :
First series show the votes secured by the successful Caste Hindu 
candidate and the successful Scheduled Caste candidate in the Final 
election.
Second series show in how many cases did reliance on reservation clause 
become necessary for the success of the Scheduled Caste candidate 
in the Final election and in how many he succeeded without the 
benefit of reservation.
Third series show the relative voting strength of the Caste Hindus and 
the Scheduled Castes in constituencies in which seats are reserved 
for the Scheduled Castes.
Fourth series show the position in the Primary election of the Scheduled 
Caste Candidates who became successful in the Final elections.
3. The conclusions that follow from these figures will not escape those 
who care to examine them. The figures prove the following propositions :
 (i) That every of the Scheduled Caste candidate who became successful 
in the Final election owed his success to the votes of the caste Hindus 
and not of the Scheduled Castes. A great many of them came to the 
top of the poll and secured votes equal to and in some cases larger 
than those obtained by Caste Hindu candidates (See Tables in the 
First Series). Secondly, in very few constituencies was the successful 
Scheduled Caste candidate required to rely on reservation (See Tables 
in the Second Series). This is a most unexpected phenomenon. Anyone 
who compares the voting strength of the Scheduled Castes with the 
voting strength of the Caste Hindus in the different constituencies 
(See Tables in the Third Series) would realize that the voting strength 
of the Scheduled Castes is so small that such a phenomenon could 
never have occurred if only the Scheduled Castes voters had voted 
for the Scheduled Caste candidates. That they have occurred is proof 
positive that the success of the Scheduled Caste candidate in the 
Final election is conditioned by the Caste Hindu votes.
 (ii) That comparing the results of the Primary election with those of 
the Final election (See Tables in the Fourth series) the Scheduled 
Caste candidate who was elected in the Final election was one
