275
 
EVIDENCE BEFORE THE SOUTHBOROUGH COMMITTEE
The definition of an “untouchable” as a person who would cause 
pollution by his touch, was a satisfactory one for electoral purposes. It 
was not the case that some castes were considered to be untouchable in 
some districts and touchable in others.
According to his classification the untouchables amounted to about 
8 per cent of the population, but he had proposed 9 seats which would 
make about 9 per cent. These seats should be filled by separate communal 
election.
He was aware that the untouchable in his present state of development 
was in no way qualified to give a responsible vote. In the whole Bombay 
Presidency there were one B.A. and 6 or 7 matriculates among the 
depressed classes. The proportion of those who were literate in English 
was very small, but not much smaller than in the case of the backward 
classes. The depressed classes, especially the Mahars and the Chamars, 
were fit to exercise the vote. He would also give them the votes by way of 
education. He could find at least 25 or more men amongst them who had 
passed the 6th or the 7th Standards of a High School, and, although the 
number was not large, the 9 seats which he suggested for the depressed 
classes could be filled from amongst them. Such a candidate in practical 
matters would be as good as a graduate although, the latter might be 
able to express himself better.
He was opposed to any system under which the representatives of 
the depressed classes were drawn from other classes. Representation by 
missionaries, for instance, would not be representation in any real sense 
of the word.
He suggested large constituencies for the depressed classes; if such 
large constituencies had been accepted for the Mohammedans he did not 
see why they were not practicable in the case of the depressed classes.
In order to obtain the required number of seats for the depressed classes 
he would reduce the number of seats suggested by Government for the 
Mohammedans, from 18 to 10. This reduction was justifiable, as on the 
population basis the Mohammedans were only entitled to 20 per cent of 
the seats. He did not consider the Congress League Pact as binding on all.
Mr. Hailey : Untouchables were persons to whom certain rights of 
citizenship had been denied. For instance, it was the right of every 
citizen to walk down the street, and if a man were prevented from doing 
so, even temporarily, it was an infringement of his right. Whether a 
man was prevented from exercising his rights by law or social custom, 
made very little difference to him. Government had recognised custom 
and persons belonging to the untouchable classes were not employed in 
Government service.
