320
 
DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES
is also valid privilege, but that also is denied. The right to criticise on a 
proper motion the conduct of the judiciary is always open to the legislature, 
but that also has been excluded. It is difficult to see exactly in what way 
the Federal legislature could influence the internal administration of the 
Indian States. Not only the representatives of British India are prevented 
from asking any question or moving any resolution with regard to the 
internal administration of the States, but the same disability is imposed 
upon the representatives of the States themselves who are the victims of 
this maladministration.
Compare with this the influence which the Federated States are in a 
position to exercise over British India.
In the first place there is no restriction on the representatives of the 
Federated States in the matter of asking any question or raising any matter 
in the Federal Legislature. The fact that the question or matter touches 
British India and relates to internal administration of British India is not 
a bar against the representatives of the Federated States from raising such 
an issue.
Secondly, there is no restraint upon the representatives of the Federated 
States in the matter of discussing and voting upon the financial proposals 
of the Federal Government. The fact that any such proposal affects British 
India only and does not affect the States can cause no legal impediment 
in their way.
Thirdly, in the matter of Legislation the Representatives of the Federated 
States are free to vote upon any measure brought before the Federal 
Legislature. There are two lists over which the legislative authority of the 
Federation extends—The Federal list and the Concurrent list. The provinces 
are wholly bound by the Federal List. A Federated State is not wholly bound 
by it. The provinces are wholly bound by the concurrent list. A Federated 
State may not be bound at all. Yet the State represenatives have a right to 
vote upon any measure falling under either of the two lists. In other words 
the Federal Scheme gives the States the right to legislate for British India, 
while British India gets no such right to legislate for the States except to 
the extent to which the States choose to subject themselves to these two 
legislative lists.
The scope of this Legislative influence by the States over British India is 
by no means small nor is it inconsequential. To Confine to the Concurrent 
list only, it includes 36 subjects. Among the 36 are such subjects as, Criminal 
Law, Criminal and Civil Procedure, Professions, Newspapers, Books and 
Printing Press etc. It is clear that these subjects are vital subjects. They 
affect the liberties of the people in the Provinces. Now as the States have a 
right to participate and vote upon all legislation within the Concurrent list, 
the Indian States will have the right and the authority to pass legislation 
affecting the rights, privileges and liberties of British Indians in the Provinces.
