230
 
DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES
hero-worship is dying. Of that there is no doubt. It was dying even in the 
days of Carlyle who indignantly complained against his age saying—
“This is an age that as it were denies the existence of great men : denies 
the inevitableness of great men.”
“Show our critics a great man”, he said and “They begin to what they call 
‘account for him’; not to worship him but take the dimensions of him.”
But hero-worship is certainly not dead in India. India is still par excellence 
the land of idolatry. There is idolatry in religion, there is idolatry in politics. 
Heroes and hero-worship is a hard if unfortunate, fact in India’s political life. 
I agree that hero-worship is demoralizing for the devotee and dangerous to 
the country. I welcome the criticism in so far as it conveys a caution that 
you must know that your man is really great before you start worshipping 
him. This unfortunately is not an easy task. For in these days, with the 
Press in hand, it is easy to manufacture great men. Carlyle used a happy 
phrase when he described the great men of history as so many Bank Notes. 
Like Bank Notes they represent gold. What we have to see is that they are 
not forged notes. I admit that we ought to be more cautious in our worship 
of great men. For in this country we have perhaps arrived at such a stage 
when alongside the notice boards saying “beware of pickpockets” we need to 
have notice boards saying “beware of great men”. Even Carlyle who defended 
the worship of great men warned his readers how :
“Multitudes of men have figured in history as great men who were false and 
selfish.” He regretted deeply that “The World’s wages (of homage) are pocketed 
(by these so-called great men), the World’s work is not done. Heroes have gone 
out; quacks have come in.”
Ranade never received the honours of apotheosis as these great men of 
India today are destined to receive. How could he ? He did not come with a 
message hot from Senai. He performed no miracles and promised no speedy 
deliverance and splendour. He was not a genius and he had no superhuman 
qualities. But there are compensations. If Ranade did not show splendour 
and dominance he brought us no catastrophe. If he had no superhuman 
qualities to use in the service of India, India was saved from ruin by its 
abuse. If he was not a genius, he did not display that perverse supersubtlety 
of intellect and a temper of mind which is fundamentally dishonest and which 
has sown the seeds of distrust and which has made settlement so difficult 
of achievement. There is nothing exuberant and extravagant in Ranade. 
He refused to reap cheap notoriety by playing the part of an extremist. 
He refused to mislead people by playing upon and exploiting the patriotic 
sentiments of the people. He refused to be a party to methods which are
