STATES AND MINORITIES
447
 Appendix IV
STATISTICS OF POPULATION
The population of the Scheduled Caste in 1941 is estimated at 48,793,180. 
Can this figure be accepted as accurate ?
In coming to a definite conclusion on this issue the following points must 
be borne in mind : —
 (i) The population of the Scheduled Castes in 1941 as compared with 
their population in 1931 shows a decline. 
 (ii) The population of all other communities during the same period 
shows an increase of 15 per cent.
The question is whether there is any special reason why the population 
of the Scheduled Castes should have declined.
Was the basis for computation of the population of the Scheduled Castes 
in 1931 the same as in 1941 ? The answer is in the affirmative. The figures 
given for 1931 are the result of recasting of the Census of 1931 in the 
light of the definition of “Untouchables” given by the Lothian Committee. 
The same basis was adopted in 1941. It cannot therefore be said that the 
decline in the population of the Scheduled Castes in 1941 was due to an 
over-estimate made in 1931.
It is true that the Census for 1941 does not give any figures for the 
Scheduled Castes for Ajmer-Merwara and Gwalior State. But even adding to 
the total for 1941 the figures for these two areas as they stood in 1931 the 
population comes to only 49,538,145 which still shows a comparative decline.
The want of any proper explanation for the decline of the Scheduled Caste 
population and an increase in the population of all other communities during 
the same decade only reinforces the impression which every honest student 
of Indian census has formed namely that the Census of India has over a 
number of decades ceased to be an operation in demography. It has become 
a political affair. Every community seems to be attempting to artificially 
augment its numbers at the cost of some other community for the sake of 
capturing greater and greater degree of political power in its own hands. 
The Scheduled Castes seem to have been made a common victim for the 
satisfaction of the combined greed of the other communities who through 
their propagandists or enumerators are able to control the operation and 
the results of the Census.
In the light of these circumstances it is fair to demand that an accurate 
figure for the population of the Scheduled Castes would be the Census 
figure as corrected by the inclusion of the population for Ajmer-Merwara 
and Gwalior State plus an increase of 15 per cent to give them the benefit 
of the general rise in the population.
