126
 
DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES
in favour of the claim of Maharashtrians for the inclusion of Bombay in 
Maharashtra. It is quite possible that these arguments may suggest themselves 
to the Commission. But I don’t like to leave it to chance. I therefore propose 
to set them out below even though the Commission might think that it was 
unnecessary.
Calcutta and Bombay
63. In deciding upon the issue of exclusion of Bombay from Maharashtra 
the Commission will have to take into account the position of Calcutta. Like 
Bombay it is the chief emporium of the whole of eastern part of India. Like 
the Maharashtrians in Bombay the Bengalis in Calcutta are in a minority. 
Like the Maharashtrians in Bombay, the Bengalis do not own the trade 
and industry of Calcutta. The position of the Bengalis vis-a-vis Calcutta is 
worse than the position of the Maharashtrians vis-a-vis Bombay. For, the 
Maharashtrians can at least claim that they have supplied labour if not 
capital for the trade and industry of Bombay. The Bengalis cannot even say 
this. If the Commission can accept the arguments urged for the separation 
of Bombay from Maharashtra, it must be equally prepared to recommend 
the separation of Calcutta from West Bengal. For it is a very pertinent 
question to ask that if for the reasons given Bombay can be separated from 
Maharashtra why when the same reasons exist Calcutta be not separated 
from West Bengal.
Is Bombay Viable
64. Before Bombay can be separated it must be proved that financially 
Bombay is a viable Province. As I have already said if proper accounting of 
revenue and expenditure was made Bombay on the basis of present level of 
taxation may not be a self-sufficient Province. If that be so, the proposal for 
creating Bombay a separate Province must fall to the ground. It is no use 
comparing Bombay with Provinces like Orissa and Assam. The standard of 
administration, the standard of living and consequently the level of wages 
in Bombay are all so high that I doubt that even with a crashing rate of 
taxation Bombay will be able to raise the necessary amount of revenue to 
meet the expenditure.
The aim behind Greater Bombay
65. This doubt regarding viability of Bombay Province is heightened 
by the indecent haste shown by the Government of Bombay in creating 
Greater Bombay by including within the limits of Bombay the adjoining 
parts of Maharashtra. It seems that the object of including such area 
cannot but be to make Bombay viable. What else can it be? So long as 
Bombay remained part of Maharashtra it did not matter to Maharashtrians 
in which administrative area a portion of Maharashtra was included. But 
when Bombay is to be a separate Province it will take a long time to make 
