 
THOUGHTS ON LINGUISTIC STATES
149
There is a vast difference between the North and the South. The North is 
conservative. The South is progressive. The North is superstitious, the South 
is rational. The South is educationally forward, the North is educationally 
backward. The culture of the South is modern. The culture of the North is 
ancient.
Did not Prime Minister Nehru on the 15th of August 1947 sit at the 
Yajna performed by the Brahmins of Benares to celebrate the event of a 
Brahmin becoming the first Prime Minister of free and independent India 
and wear the Raja Danda given to him by these Brahmins and drink the 
water of the Ganges brought by them ?
How many women have been forced to go Sati in recent days and immolate 
themselves on the funeral pyre of their dead husbands. Did not the President 
recently go to Benares and worship the Brahmins, washed their toes and 
drank the water ?
The North still has its Satis, its Nanga Sadhus. What havoc the Nanga 
Sadhus made at the last Hardwar Fair ! Did anyone in U.P. protest against 
it ?
How can the rule of the North be tolerated by the South ? Already there 
signs of the South wanting to break away from the North.
Mr. Rajagopalachari has made a statement on the recommendations of 
the States Reorganization Commission which has appeared in the Times of 
India of the 27th November, 1955. This is what he says :
“If it is impossible to put the States Reorganization Schemes in cold storage 
for the next 15 years, the only alternative is for the Centre to govern India as 
a unitary state and deal with district officers and district boards directly, with 
regional commissioners’ supervision.
“It would be utterly wrong to fritter away national energy in dispute 
over boundaries and divisions conceived in the drawing room and not on the 
background of conditions that have resulted historically.
“Apart from the general convictions of mine, I feel that a large southern 
State is absolutely essential for preserving the political significance of that part 
of the country. To cut the South up into Tamil, Malayalam and other small 
States will result only in complete insignificance of everybody and, in the net 
result, India as a whole will be the poorer.”
Mr. Rajagopalachari has not expressed himself fully. He did do so fully 
and openly to me when he was the Head of the State and I was the Law 
Minister in charge of drafting the constitution. I went to Mr. Rajagopalachari 
for my usual interview which was the practice of the day. At one such 
interview Mr. Rajagopalachari, referring to the sort of constitution which 
the Constituent Assembly was making, said to me, “You are committing 
a great mistake. One federation for the whole of India with equal
