COMMUNAL DEADLOCK AND A WAY TO SOLVE IT
359
a Constitution for India, do not seem to have realized this difference. The 
difference lies in this that the past Constitutions contained a breakdown 
clause. But the future Constitution of India cannot contain such a breakdown 
clause. People in India decry the breakdown clause—by now the notorious 
section 93 of the Government of India Act, 1935. That is because they do 
not know the why and the how of its place in the Act. Its importance will 
become apparent if two important considerations governing the political life 
of a community are borne in mind. First of these considerations is that Law 
and Order is the medicine of the body politic, and when the body politic 
goes sick this medicine must be administered. Indeed, so important is this 
consideration that failure to administer it must be deemed to be a crime 
against society and civilization. The second consideration is that though it 
is true that no government has a vested right to govern, it is equally true 
that there must always be a government to govern—which I mean maintain 
Law and Order—until it is displaced by a better government. The breakdown 
clause serves these two purposes. As such, it is of the highest value for the 
peace and tranquillity of the people. It is the one and only means which can 
save the country from anarchy. For, when Constitutional Government fails, 
the breakdown clause has at least the merit of maintaining Government.
In the past this distinction between Constitutional Government 
and Government with the provision for Government stepping in when 
Constitutional Government failed, was a feasible proposition. It was 
feasible because while the British Government gave Indians the right to 
a Constitutional Government, it kept to itself the right to govern, should 
Constitutional Government fail. In the future Constitution of India, it 
would not be possible to maintain this distinction. It would not be possible 
for the British Government to give the Indians the right to Constitutional 
Government and also to keep to itself the right to govern in case there was 
a breakdown in the Constitutional Government. The reason is quite obvious. 
The past Constitutions of India did not treat India as a Dominion. The future 
Constitution will proceed on the assumption that India will be a Dominion. 
The breakdown clause or the possibility of Government stepping in, when 
Constitutional Government has failed, can be reconciled in the case of a 
country, which has no Dominion Status. But the two are irreconcilable in 
the case of a Dominion. In the case of a Dominion or for the matter of that 
in the case of any free country, there is either a Constitutional Government 
or a Rebellion.
What does this mean ? It means that it is impossible to frame a Constitution 
for an Indian Dominion with a possibility of a breakdown. To put the same 
thing in a different language the Constitution must be so made that it will 
not only command the obedience but also the respect of all ; and all or if 
not all, at any rate, all important elements in the national life of India shall 
be prepared to uphold it and to give it their support. This can happen only
