158
 
DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES
a place of refuge where they can be free from the tyranny of the majority. 
If there was a United Maharashtra with Bombay included in it where they 
can go to for safety ? The same tyranny was practised over the Brahmins, 
Marwaris and Gujarathis living in the villages when Godse killed Mr. Gandhi. 
All the Brahmins, Marwaris and Gujarathis who were once living in villages 
ran away and are now living in towns and forgetting their experiences are 
shouting for United Maharashtra, after having reached a safe harbour.
It seems to me that Maharashtrians will do well to accept the decision 
of the Congress High Command for the time being.
The Maharashtrians need have no fear of losing Bombay. Nobody can 
dispossess Maharashtrians of Bombay. Much less can there be any custer 
of them by anybody.
The real objection to the creation of Bombay as a separate State arises 
from the fact that the name Bombay does not carry within it the sense that 
it is part of Maharashtra. It is to remove this objection that I propose that 
the new State of Bombay should be renamed by another name which will 
carry on its face the word Maharashtra.
Supposing in terms of this suggestion instead of saying that Bombay 
be made a separate State it is said that Maharashtra be divided into four 
States, (1) Maharashtra City State (which is Bombay City), (2) Western 
Maharashtra, (3) Central Maharashtra, (4) Eastern Maharashtra; what 
objection can there be to the creation of a separate State of Bombay ?
This also involves the separation of Bombay. With this change in the 
name of the City I like to know which Maharashtrian can raise objection 
to the creation of Bombay as a separate City State on the ground that this 
scheme separates Bombay from Maharashtra ? To say that Bombay be made 
a separate State is merely stating that Maharashtra be divided into four 
States. If there is no objection to Maharashtra being divided into two or 
three States what objection can there be to Maharashtra being divided into 
four? I can see none. For the sake of similarity in language I propose that 
Calcutta be called Bengal City State and Madras be called Tamil City State.
This is one proposal which I make to ease the tension between 
Maharashtrians and Gujarathis.
The Maharashtra City State will be a surplus State. Those who are 
wanting United Maharashtra with Bombay are hoping to get the benefit of 
this surplus for Maharashtra.
The surplus revenue of the City State arises because of (1) The Property 
Tax and (2) The Electricity Tax. Can the revenue from these two sources 
be appropriated by Maharashtra if Bombay becomes a separate City State ?
Nothing can be done to take away the yield of the Property Tax from 
the Bombay City State Property Tax. It is a local tax, on local situated
