420
 
DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES
and to claim the privileges of a political majority which it is not. But 
surely there is a difference between a defeat which is a complete rout and 
a defeat which is almost victory though not a victory. Cricketers know what 
difference there is between the defeat of a team by a few runs, a defeat by 
a few wickets and a defeat by one whole innings. The defeat by one whole 
innings is a complete frustration which a defeat by a few runs is not. Such 
a frustration when it comes about in the political life of a minority depresses 
and demoralizes and crushes the spirit of the minority. This must be avoided 
at any price. Looked at from this point of view there is no doubt that the 
rule of population—ratio—representation insisted upon by the majority 
is wrong. What a minority needs is not more representation but effective 
representation.
And what is effective representation? Obviously the effectiveness of 
representation depends upon its being large enough to give the minority 
the sense of not being entirely overwhelmed by the majority. Representation 
according to population to a minority or to the minorities combined may be 
effective by reason of the fact that the population of a minority where there 
is only one or of the combined minorities where there are many is large 
enough to secure effective minority representation. But there may be cases 
where the population of a minority or of the minorities combined is too small 
to secure such effective representation if the population ratio of a minority is 
taken as an inflexible standard to determine its quantum of representation. 
To insist upon such a standard is to make mockery of the protection to the 
minority which is the purpose behind the right to representation which is 
accepted as the legitimate claim of a minority. In such cases weightage 
which is another name for deduction from the quantum of representation 
which is due to the majority on the basis of its population becomes essential 
and the majority if it wishes to be fair and honest must concede it. There 
can therefore be no quarrel over the principle of weightage. On this footing 
the controversy becomes restricted to the question, how is the magnitude 
of weightage to be determined ? This obviously is a question of adjustment 
and not of principle.
There can therefore be no manner of objection to the principle of weightage. 
The demand for weightage is however a general demand of all the minorities 
and the Scheduled Castes must join them in it where the majority is too big. 
What is however wrong with the existing weightage is unequal distribution 
among the various minorities. At present, some minorities have secured a 
lion’s share and some like the Untouchables have none. This wrong must be 
rectified by a distribution of the weightage on some intelligible principles.
(3) Electorates
1. The method of election to the seals allotted to the Scheduled Castes 
is set out in clauses (2) to (4) of the Poona Pact. It provides for two
