 
MAHARASHTRA AS A LINGUISTIC PROVINCE
121
allowed all other communities coming from outside Maharashtra to 
monopolize the trade and industry of Maharashtra. But as I have shown 
there is no surplus and no question of Maharashtrians casting their eyes 
on it.
43. But supposing such a motive in the minds of the Maharashtrians, 
what is wrong in it ? It is quite open to Maharashtrians to contend that 
they have a greater claim on Bombay’s surplus because they have played 
and they will continue to play a greater part in supplying labour for the 
building up of the trade and industry of Bombay more than the people 
from other Provinces have done or likely to do. It would be difficult for 
any economist with any reputation to save who could deny that labour 
has as much claim on the wealth produced as capital if not more.
44. Secondly, the surplus from Bombay is not consumed by Maharashtra 
alone but is consumed by the whole of India. The proceeds of the Income-
tax, Super-tax, etc. which Bombay pays to the Central Government are 
all spent by the Central Government for all-India purposes and is shared 
by all other Provinces. To Prof. Vakil it does not matter if the surplus 
of Bombay is eaten up by United Provinces, Bihar, Assam, Orissa, West 
Bengal, East Punjab and Madras. What he objects to is Maharashtra 
getting any part of it. This is not an argument. It is only an exhibition 
of his hatred for Maharashtrians.
45. Granting that Bombay was made into a separate Province, what 
I don’t understand is how Prof. Vakil is going to prevent Maharashtra 
from getting share of Bombay surplus revenue. Even if Bombay is made 
separate Province, Bombay will have to pay income-tax, super-tax, etc. 
and surely Maharashtra will get a part of the revenue paid by Bombay 
to the Centre either directly or indirectly. As I have said the argument 
has in it more malice than substance.
POINTS (8) AND (9)
General arguments against the inclusion of Bombay in Maharashtra
46. I will now turn to the Points (8) and (9) which have been urged by 
Professors Dantwala and Gheewala. Their arguments strike at the very root 
of the principle of Linguistic Provinces. As such I should have dealt with 
them in Part I of this Memorandum. But as the aim of their argument is 
to exclude Bombay from being included in Maharashtra, I have thought 
it proper to deal with them in this Part of the Memorandum as they 
are really arguments against the inclusion of Bombay in Maharashtra.
47. The sum total of the arguments of the two Professors is that 
Linguistic Provinces are bad. This cry against Linguistic Provinces is too 
late. Since when two Professors having been holding these views is not 
known. Are they opposed to Gujarat being reconstituted on Linguistic
