166
 
DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES
From these statements the following propositions stand out :
 (1) That upto a certain year in the life of the States there was no deficit. 
They were all viable. It is only after Congress came into office that States 
ceased to be viable.
 (2) That since the Congress came into office the Excise Revenue has begun 
to dwindle. It has gone down to a vanishing point.
 (3) That Income Tax and Sales Tax have increased enormously.
These are the causes which explain why States have ceased to be viable.
The Excise Revenue is being sacrificed for a false idealogy which has no 
meaning, no sense and no reality.
In regard to the Policy of Prohibition followed by the Congress, the following 
conclusions can be drawn without fear of challenge :
 (1) An enormous amount of revenue is sacrificed for nothing.
 (2) People have not ceased to drink. There is enormous amount of illicit 
manufacture of liquor which is being sold to the public clandestinely.
 (3) The money lost by Government is picked up by the illicit manufacturer.
 (4) Prohibition has demoralized Society. Formerly only male members of 
the family drank because they alone could go to the liquor shop. Now 
illicit liquor manufacture has become a Home Industry. Liquor being 
now made at home both men and women drink.
 (5) In addition to the loss of revenue on account of Prohibition Government 
has to undertake increased expenditure on Police to enforce Prohibition 
which, however, they never do.
What good is this Prohibition which does not prohibit ? The Congress threatens 
to extend this Prohibition to the whole of India. God bless the Congress! It is 
said that God first makes them mad whom. He wishes to destroy. God is doing 
the same with Congressmen.
It is enough for me to say that Congress cannot have both viability and 
Prohibition.
Coming to the Land Revenue it could certainly be increased. But the Congress 
is afraid to touch the agriculturist for fear of losing votes. It is therefore raising 
money from the Sales Tax and the Income Tax both of which fall so heavily on 
the urban classes as is apparent from Table No. 6.
It is therefore clear that viability is no problem. Only the Congress has to 
revise its Taxation Policy.
Viability is a question of capacity to bear taxation and will to tax. There is 
enough capacity. What is wanted is will.
The whole of the Indian Taxation system requires to be changed. It is a 
question of altering the Constitution. I cannot deal with it now. I must reserve 
it for another occasion.
