218
 
DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES
the political patriot challenges Government he has whole society to support 
him. He is praised, admired and elevated as the saviour. Who shows more 
courage—The social reformer who fights alone or the political patriot who 
fights under the cover of vast mass of supporters ? It would be idle to deny 
that Ranade showed courage in taking up the cause of social reform. Indeed 
he showed a high degree of courage. For let it be remembered that he lived 
in times when social and religious customs however gross and unmoral 
were regarded as sacrosanct and when any doubt questioning their divine 
and moral basis was regarded not merely as heterodoxy but as intolerable 
blasphemy and sacrilege.
V
His path as a reformer was not smooth. It was blocked from many 
sides. The sentiments of the people whom he wanted to reform were deeply 
rooted in the ancient past. They held the belief that their ancestors were 
the wisest and the noblest of men, and the social system which they had 
devised was of the most ideal character. What appeared to Ranade to be 
the shames and wrongs of the Hindu society were to them the most sacred 
injunctions of their religion. This was the attitude of the common man. The 
intelligentsia was divided into two schools—a school which was orthodox in 
its belief but unpolitical in its outlook, and a school which was modern in its 
beliefs but primarily political in its aims and objects. The former was led by 
Mr. Chiplunkar and the latter by Mr. Tilak. Both combined against Ranade 
and created as many difficulties for him as they could. They not only did 
the greatest harm to the cause of social reform, but as experience shows 
they have done the greatest harm to the cause of political reform in India. 
The unpolitical or the orthodox school believed in the Hegelian view—it is a 
puzzle to me—namely to realize the ideal and idealize the real. In this it was 
egregiously wrong. The Hindu religious and social system is such that you 
cannot go forward to give its ideal form a reality because the ideal is bad ; 
nor can you attempt to elevate the real to the status of the ideal because the 
real, i.e., the existing state of affairs, is worse than worse could be. This is 
no exaggeration. Take the Hindu religious system or take the Hindu social 
system, and examine it from the point of social utility and social justice. It is 
said that religion is good when it is fresh from the mint. But Hindu religion 
has been a bad coin to start with. The Hindu ideal of society as prescribed 
by Hindu religion has acted as a most demoralizing and degrading influence 
on Hindu society. It is Nietzschean in its form and essence. Long before 
Nietzsche was born Manu had proclaimed the gospel which Nietzsche sought 
to preach. It is a religion which is not intended to establish liberty, equality 
and fraternity. It is a gospel which proclaims the worship of the superman— 
the Brahmin by the rest of the Hindu society. It propounds that the superman 
and his class alone are born to live and to rule. Others are born to serve
