SMALL HOLDINGS IN INDIA AND THEIR REMEDIES
475
labour is, therefore, a calamity ; for if it cannot live by production as it 
should, it will live by predation as it must. This idle labour has been the 
canker of India gnawing at its vitals. Instead of contributing to our national 
dividend it is eating up what little there is of it. Thus the depression of 
our national dividend is another important effect of this idle labour. The 
income of a society as of an individual proceeds (1) from the efforts made, 
and (2) from possessions used. It may be safely asserted that the aggregate 
income of any individual or society must be derived either from the proceeds 
of the current labour or from productive possession already acquired. All 
that society can have today it must acquire today or must take out of its 
past product. Judging by this criterion a large portion of our society makes 
very little current effort; nor does it have any very extensive possessions 
from which to derive its sustenance. No doubt then that our economic 
organization is conspicuous by want of capital. Capital is but crystallized 
surplus ; and surplus depends upon the proceeds of effort. But where there 
is no effort there is no earning, no surplus, and no capital.
We have thus shown how our bad social economy is responsible for the 
ills of our agriculture. We have also proved how our entire dependence 
on agriculture leads to small and scattered farms. How a large portion 
of our population which our agriculture cannot productively employ is 
obliged to remain idle has been made clear. We have also shown how the 
existence of this idle labour makes ours a country without capital. This 
being our analysis of the problem, it will be easy to see why the remedies 
for consolidation and enlargement under the existing social economy are 
bound to fail.
Those who look on small holdings as the fundamental evil naturally 
advocate their enlargement. This, however, is a faulty political economy 
and as Thomas Arnold once said “a faulty political economy is the fruitful 
parent of crime”. Apart from the fact that merely to enlarge the holding 
is not to make it economic, this project of artificial enlargement is fraught 
with many social ills. The future in the shape of an army of landless and 
dispossessed men that it is bound to give rise to is neither cheerful from 
the individual, nor agreeable from the national, point of view. But even if 
we enlarged the existing holdings and procured enough capital and capital 
goods to make them economic, we will not only be not advocating the proper 
remedy but will end in aggravating the evils by adding to our stock of idle 
labour; for capitalistic agriculture will not need as many hands as are now 
required by our present day methods of cultivation.
But if enlargement is not possible, can we not have consolidation? It 
can be shown that under the existing social economy even consolidation 
is not possible. The remedy for preventing sub-division and fragmentation
