309
 
FEDERATION VERSUS FREEDOM
Federated State is also a unit. This is a most extraordinary feature of this 
Indian Federation and also one of its worst features. One of the results of 
a Federation, if not its primary object, has been the freedom of trade and 
commerce inside the territory of the Federation. There is no federation known 
to history which has permitted one unit of the Federation to levy customs 
duties or raise other barriers with a view to prevent inter-State commerce. 
The Indian Federation is an exception to that rule and this is a feature of 
the Indian Federation which makes it stand out in glaring contrast with 
other federations with which people are familiar today.
One of the characteristics of a Federal Constitution is that although the 
territory comprised in the Federation is distributed or held by different units, 
still they constitute one single territory. At any rate for customs purposes 
the territory is treated as a single unit. Every Federal Constitution contains 
powers and prohibitions to prevent trade and customs barriers being erected 
by one unit against another.
The American constitution by Section 9 of Article II prohibits a State from 
preventing the import or export of goods or from levying import or export 
duties upon goods passing in or out of the State boundary. Section 8(3) of 
Article II gives the Federal Government the power of regulating trade or 
commerce between the States of the Union.
In Australia by virtue of Section 92 of its Constitution both the States and 
the Federal Government are bound so to exercise their power of regulation 
as not to transgress the fundamental guarantee of the Constitution embodied 
in Section 92 that “trade and commerce among the States whether by means 
of internal carriage or ocean navigation shall be absolutely free”.
In Canada section 121 enacts that “all articles of the growth, produce 
or manufacture of any one Province shall, from and after the Union, be 
admitted free into each of the other Provinces.”
In the Indian Constitution the provision relating to freedom of trade 
and commerce within the Federation is contained in Section 297. It reads 
as follows :
“297. (1) No Provincial Legislature or Government shall—
 (a) by virtue of the entry in the Provincial Legislative List relating to 
trade and commerce within the Province, or the entry in that list 
relating to the production, supply, and distribution of commodities, 
have power to pass any law or take any executive action prohibiting 
or restricting the entry into, or export from, the Province of goods 
of any class or description ; or
 (b) by virtue of anything in this Act have power to impose any tax, cess, 
toll, or due which, as between goods manufactured or produced in 
the Province and similar goods not so manufactured or produced, 
discriminates in favour of the former, or which, in the case of goods 
manufactured or produced outside the Province, discriminates between
