329
 
FEDERATION VERSUS FREEDOM
The Congress at its session held at Haripura in 1938 passed the following 
resolution:
“The Congress has rejected the new Constitution and declared that a 
Constitution for India, which can be accepted by the people, must be based 
on independence and can only be framed by the people themselves by means 
of a Constituent Assembly, without interference by any foreign authority. 
Adhering to this policy of rejection, the Congress has, however, permitted the 
formation in provinces of Congress Ministries with a view to strengthen the 
nation in its struggle for independence. In regard to the proposed Federation, 
no such considerations apply even provisionally or for a period, and the 
imposition of this Federation will do grave injury to India and tighten the 
bonds which hold her in subjection to imperialist domination. This scheme 
of Federation excludes from the sphere of responsibility vital functions of 
Government.
The Congress is not opposed to the idea of Federation ; but a real 
Federation must, even apart from the question of responsibility consist of free 
units enjoying more or less the same measure of freedom and civil liberty, 
and representation by the democratic process of election. The Indian States 
participating in the Federation should approximate to the provinces in the 
establishment of representative institutions and responsible Government, 
civil liberties and method of election to the Federal Houses. Otherwise the 
Federation as it is now contemplated, will, instead of building up Indian 
unity, encourage separatist tendencies and involve the States in internal 
and external conflicts.
The Congress therefore reiterates its condemnation of the proposed Federal 
Scheme and calls upon the Provincial and Local Congress Committees and 
the people generally, as well as the Provincial Governments and Ministries, 
to prevent its inauguration. In the event of an attempt being made to impose 
it, despite the declared will of the people, such an attempt must be combated 
in every way and the Provincial Governments and Ministries must refuse to 
co-operate with it. In case such a contingenncy arises, the All India Congress 
Committee is authorised and directed to determine the line of action to be 
pursued in this regard.”.
The resolution passed by the National Liberal Federation at its last session 
held in Bombay was in the following terms:
“The National Liberal Federation reiterates its opinion that the Constitution, 
especially as regards the Centre as embodied in the Government of India Act, 
1935, is utterly unsatisfactory and in several respects retrogade. While the 
National Liberal Federation accepts a federal form of Government for India 
as the only natural ideal for our country, the Federation considers that vital 
changes are required in the form of the Federation as laid down in the Act
