225
 
RANADE, GANDHI AND JINNAH
sojourn in foreign lands ; (4) women’s rights of property and (5) education of 
women. Of this programme he achieved a great part. If he did not achieve 
all, there were the odds against him, which should never be forgotten. A 
clever, determined and an insincere intelligentsia came forward to defend 
orthodoxy and give battle to Ranade. The scenes were exciting, as exciting 
as those of a dread grim of battle. And battle it was. One cannot recall the 
spirit of the time when this controversy over social reform was raging in 
this country. It is not possible for decency to enter into the abuses that were 
hurled, the calumnies that were uttered, the strategies that were employed 
by the orthodox section against the Social Reformers. It is impossible to 
read the writing of those who supported orthodoxy in their opposition to the 
Age of Consent Bill without realizing the depth of the degradation to which 
the so-called leaders of the peoples had fallen. The Bill aimed to punish a 
husband who would have sexual intercourse with his wife if she had not 
attained the age of 12. Could any sane man, could any man with a sense of 
shame oppose so simple a measure ? But it was opposed, and Ranade had to 
bear the brunt of the mad orthodoxy. Assuming that Ranade’s achievements 
were small; who could take pride or exultation in his failure to achieve 
more ? There was no cause for exultation. The decline of social reform was 
quite natural. The odium of social reform was too great. The appeal of 
political power too alluring. The result was that social reform found fewer 
and fewer adherents. In course of time the platform of the Social Reform 
Conference was deserted and men flocked to the Indian National Congress. 
The politicians triumphed over the social reformers. I am sure that nobody 
will now allow that their triumph was a matter for pride. It is certainly 
a matter of sorrow. Ranade may not have been altogether on the winning 
side, but he was not on the wrong side and certainly never on the side of 
the wrong as some of his opponents were.
VIII
How does Ranade compare with others ? Comparisons are always odious 
and unpleasant. At the same time it is true that there is nothing more 
illuminating than comparisons. Of course in making them one must bear in 
mind that to be interesting and instructive comparisons must be between 
those that are alike. Fortunately there is field for comparison. Ranade was 
a social reformer and as a social reformer he could be usefully compared 
with other social reformers. Particularly illuminating will be the comparison 
between Ranade and Jotiba Phule. Phule was born in 1827 and died in 
1890. Ranade was born in 1842 and died in 1901. Thus Phule and Ranade 
were contemporaries and both were foremost social reformers. Some may 
perhaps demur to the wisdom of comparing Ranade with other politicians. 
This can only be on the ground that Ranade was not a politician. To say that 
Ranade was not a politician is to impose a very narrow and very restricted 
meaning upon the term politician. A politician does not merely trade in 
politics but he also represents particular faith covering both—the method
