412
 
DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES
without Dictatorship, to have State Socialism with Parliamentary 
Democracy. The way out seems to be to retain Parliamentary Democracy 
and to prescribe State Socialism by the Law of the Constitution so that it 
will be beyond the reach of a Parliamentary majority to suspend, amend 
or abrogate it. It is only by this that one can achieve the triple object, 
namely, to establish socialism, retain Parliamentary Democracy and avoid 
Dictatorship.
The proposal marks a departure from the existing Constitutions whose 
aim is merely to prescribe the form of the political structure of society 
leaving the economic structure untouched. The result is that the political 
structure is completely set at naught by the forces which emerge from 
the economic structure which is at variance with the political structure. 
Those who want socialism with Parliamentary Democracy and without 
Dictatorship should welcome the proposal.
The soul of Democracy is the doctrine of one man, one value. Unfortunately, 
Democracy has attempted to give effect to this doctrine only so far as the 
political structure is concerned by adopting the rule of one man, one vote 
which is supposed to translate into fact the doctrine of one man, one 
value. It has left the economic structure to take the shape given to it 
by those who are in a position to mould it. This has happened because 
Constitutional Laywers have been dominated by the antiquated conception 
that all that is necessary for a perfect Constitution for Democracy was to 
frame a Constitutional Law which would make Government responsible 
to the people and to prevent tyranny of the people by the Government. 
Consequently, almost all Laws of Constitution which relate to countries 
which are called Democratic stop with Adult Suffrage and Fundamental 
Right. They have never advanced to the conception that the Constitutional 
Law of Democracy must go beyond Adult Suffrage and Fundamental Rights. 
In other words, old time Constitutional Lawyers believed that the scope 
and function of Constitutional Law was to prescribe the shape and form of 
the political structure of society. They never realized that it was equally 
essential to prescribe the shape and form of the economic structure of 
society, if Democracy is to live up to its principle of one man, one value. 
Time has come to take a bold step and define both the economic structure 
as well as the political structure of society by the Law of the Constitution. 
All countries like India which are late-comers in the field of Constitution-
making should not copy the faults of other countries. They should profit 
by the experience of their predecessors.
ARTICLE II—Section III
Clause 1
In the Government of India Acts of 1919 and 1935 the model that was 
adopted for framing the structure of the Executive in the Provinces and
