 
THOUGHTS ON LINGUISTIC STATES
165
the foregoing pages but which lie about scattered. These principles may be 
stated as below :
 (1) The idea of having a mixed State must be completely abandoned.
 (2) Every State must be an unilingual State. One State, one language.
 (3) The formula one State, one language must not be confused with the 
formula of one language, one State.
 (4) The formula one language, one State means that all people speaking 
one language should be brought under one Government irrespective 
of area, population and dissimilarity of conditions among the people 
speaking the language. This is the idea that underlies the agitation 
for a united Maharashtra with Bombay. This is an absurd formula 
and has no precedent for it. It must be abandoned. A people speaking 
one language may be cut up into many States as is done in other 
parts of the world.
 (5) Into how many States a people speaking one language should be cut up, 
should depend upon (1) the requirements of efficient administration, 
(2) the needs of the different areas, (3) the sentiments of the different 
areas, and (4) the proportion between the majority and minority.
 (6) As the area of the State increases the proportion of the minority 
to the majority decreases and the position of the minority becomes 
precarious and the opportunities for the majority to practise tyranny 
over the minority become greater. The States must therefore be small.
 (7) The minorities must be given protection to prevent the tyranny of the 
majority. To do this the Constitution must be amended and provisions 
must be made for a system on plural member constituencies (two or 
three) with cumulative voting.
PART IV
THE PROBLEMS OF LINGUISTIC STATES
CHAPTER 9
VIABILITY
Will the three Maharashtrian States be viable ? Will their Revenue be 
sufficient to meet their expenditure ? Such a question is bound to be asked.
It is not that such a question can be asked about Maharashtra alone. It 
can be asked about many other States in India.
I give four statements relating to Part A States, Part B States and the 
Central Government from Part III of the Report of the Taxation Inquiry 
Committee presided over by Dr. John Mathai (See Tables 4, 5, 6 and 7).
