319
 
FEDERATION VERSUS FREEDOM
 
 respect to which the Federal legislature has power to make laws for 
the State, unless the Governor-General in his discretion is satisfied 
that the matter affects Federal interest or affects a British subject 
and has given his consent to the matter being discussed or the 
question being asked ;
 (d) For prohibiting —
 (i) the discussion of, or the asking of questions on, any matter 
connected with relations between His Majesty or the Governor-
General and any foreign State or Prince ; or
 (ii) the discussion, except in relation to estimates of expenditure of, 
or the asking of questions on, any matter connected with the 
tribal area or the administration of any excluded area; or
 (iii) the discussion of, or the asking of questions on, the personal 
conduct of the ruler of any Indian State, or of a member of the 
ruling family thereof;
 
 and the section further provides that if and so far as any rule so 
made by the Governor-General is inconsistent with any rules made by 
the Chamber, the rules made by the Governor-General shall prevail.
Another section having a bearing on this point is section 40. It says: 
“No discussion shall take place in the Federal legislature with respect to the 
conduct of any judge of the Federal Court or a High Court in the discharge 
of his duties and provides that in this sub-section the reference to a High 
Court shall be construed as including a reference to any court in a Federated 
State which is a High Court for any of the purposes of Part 9 of this Act.” 
Similar provisions are contained in that part of the Act which relates to 
the constitution of the provincial legislatures. Section 84 is a counterpart of 
section 38 and prevents any member of a Provincial legislature from asking 
any question with regard to the personal conduct of the ruler of any Indian 
State or the affairs of a State. Section 86 is a counterpart of section 40.
Now it is obvious that the two most important ways open to a Legislature 
for influencing the conduct of the administration is by discussion of the 
Budget and by asking questions. The discussions on the budget had its 
origin in the theory which postulates that there can be no supply given to 
the executive unless the grievances of the people were redressed. The slogan 
of democracy has been : Redress of grievances before supplies of moneys. The 
discussion on the budget is the one opportunity of placing the grievances 
of a people before the executive. It is therefore a very valid privilege, as 
will be seen from section 34, the legislature is prevented but from placing 
the grievances of the subjects of the States before the executive on the 
floor of the House. Similarly, the right to interrogate and ask questions
