227
 
RANADE, GANDHI AND JINNAH
are always in the limelight wherever they go. Each of course claims to be 
supreme. If supremacy was their only claim, it would be a small wonder. In 
addition to supremacy each claims infallibility for himself. Pius IX during 
whose sacred regime as Pope the issue of infallibility was raging said— 
“Before I was Pope I believed in Papal infallibility, now I feel it.” This is 
exactly the attitude of the two leaders whom Providence—may I say in his 
unguarded moments—has appointed to lead us. This feeling of supre macy and 
infallibility is strengthened by the Press. One cannot help saying that. The 
language used by Gardiner to describe the Northcliffe brand of journalism, 
in my opinion, quite appropriately describes the present state of journalism 
in India. Journalism in India was once a profession. It has now become a 
trade. It has no more moral function than the manufacture of soap. It does 
not regard itself as the responsible adviser of the Public. To give the news 
uncoloured by any motive, to present a certain view of public policy which it 
believes to be for the good of the community, to correct and chastise without 
fear all those, no matter how high, who have chosen a wrong or a barren 
path, is not regarded by journalism in India its first or foremost duty. To 
accept a hero and worship him has become its principal duty. Under it, 
news gives place to sensation, reasoned opinion to unreasoning passion, 
appeal to the minds of responsible people to appeal to the emotions of the 
irresponsible. Lord Salisbury spoke of the Northcliffe journalism as written by 
office-boys for office-boys. Indian journalism is all that plus something more. 
It is written by drum-boys to glorify their heroes. Never has the interest of 
country been sacrificed so senselessly for the propagation of hero-worship. 
Never has hero-worship become so blind as we see it in India today. There 
are, I am glad to say, honourable exceptions. But they are too few and their 
voice is never heard. Entrenched behind the plaudits of the Press, the spirit 
of domination exhibited by these two great men has transgressed all limits. 
By their domination they have demoralised their followers and demoralized 
politics. By their domination they have made half their followers fools and 
the other half hypocrites. In estabhshing their supremacy they have taken 
the aid of “big business” and money magnates. For the first time in our 
country money is taking the field as an organised power. The questions 
which President Roosevelt propounded for American Public to consider will 
arise here, if they have not already arisen : Who shall rule—wealth or 
man ? Which shall lead, money or intellect ? Who shall fill public stations, 
educated and patriotic free men or the feudal serfs of corporate Capital ? 
For the present, Indian politics, at any rate the Hindu part of it, instead of 
being spiritualized has become grossly commercialized, so much so that it 
has become a byword for corruption. Many men of culture are refusing to 
concern themselves in this cesspool. Politics has become a kind of sewage 
system intolerably unsavoury and insanitary. To become a politician is like 
going to work in the drain.
