226
 
DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES
as well as the metaphysics of politics. Ranade was the founder of a school 
of politics which was distinctive for its method as well as for metaphysics. 
Used in this sense Ranade was a politician and could be usefully compared 
with other politicians. Comparisons of Ranade with social reformers and 
with politicians cannot but be illuminating and there is enough material 
for such comparisons. The question really is one of time and taste. Time 
will not permit any extensive comparison of Ranade being made both with 
social reformers as well as with politicians. I must really choose between 
comparing Ranade with social reformers or with politicians. This is a matter 
of taste. Left to myself I would have preferred to use my available time to 
compare Ranade with Phule. For I regard social Reform more fundamental 
than political reform. Unfortunately my taste is different from the taste of 
the audience and I feel that in detaining the audience I must be guided 
more by its likes and dislikes than my own. The ardour for social reform 
has cooled down. The craze for politics has held the Indian public in its grip. 
Politics has become an appetiser—a mastic the more one tastes it the more 
one craves it. The task I am undertaking is a very unpleasant one and if I 
venture upon it, it is only because it is my duty to expound fully and the 
desire of the public to know truly the value of Ranade’s political philosophy 
and his place among politicians of today.
Who are the present day politicians with whom Ranade is to be compared ? 
Ranade was a great politician of his day. He must therefore be compared 
with the greatest of today. We have on the horizon of India two great men, 
so big that they could be identified without being named—Gandhi and 
Jinnah, What sort of a history they will make may be a matter for posterity 
to tell. For us it is enough that they do indisputably make headlines for the 
Press. They hold leading strings. One leads the Hindus, the other leads the 
Muslims. They are the idols and heroes of the hour. I propose to compare 
them with Ranade. How do they compare with Ranade ? It is necessary to 
make some observations upon their temperaments and methods with which 
they have now familiarized us. I can give only my impressions of them, for 
what they are worth. The first thing that strikes me is that it would be 
difficult to find two persons who would rival them for their colossal egotism, 
to whom personal ascendency is everything and the cause of the country 
a mere counter on the table. They have made Indian politics a matter of 
personal feud. Consequences have no terror for them ; indeed they do not 
occur to them until they happen. When they do happen they either forget 
the cause, or if they remember it, they overlook it with a complacency 
which saves them from any remorse. They choose to stand on a pedestal of 
splendid isolation. They will themselves off from their equals. They prefer to 
open themselves to their inferiors. They are very unhappy at and impatient 
of criticism, but are very happy to be fawned upon by flunkeys. Both have 
developed a wonderful stagecraft and arrange things in such a way that they
