265
 
EVIDENCE BEFORE THE SOUTHBOROUGH COMMITTEE
is. The chief significance of sufferage or a political right consists in a chance 
for active and direct participation in the regulation of the terms upon which 
associated life shall be sustained. Now the terms upon which the associated 
life between the touchables and untouchables is carried on today are the 
most ignominious to the former and highly detrimental to the latter. To make 
effective the capacities of a people there must be the power to fix the social 
conditions of their exercise. If the conditions are too obdurate, it is in the 
interest of the untouchables as well as of the touchables that the conditions 
should be revised. The untouchables must be in a position to influence the 
revision. Looking to the gravity of their interests, they should get their 
representation as proposed in proportion to their population. One or two is 
only kind but neither just nor sufficient. As Lord Morley says in an earlier 
quotation, needs not numbers should govern the extent of representations.’
36. Recently there is brought into the forefront a rival scheme for the 
representation of the untouchables by the Depressed Class Mission. The 
scheme is known as co-option. The scheme proposes that the representatives 
of the untouchables should be nominated by the co-option of the elected 
members of the Council. Whether one should laugh or cry at the solicitude 
of the Mission for the untouchables it is rather difficult to decide. To cry 
is to believe that such a silly scheme would ever be adopted. The best way 
is to laugh it out. From the scheme can be easily seen that what is some 
times called benevolent interest in others may be an unwilling mask for an 
attempt to dictate to them what their good shall be, instead of an endeavour 
to agree with them so that they may seek and find the good of their own 
choice. The Mission, it must be said, was started with the intention of 
improving the condition of the Depressed Classes by emancipating them 
from the social tyranny of their high caste masters. But the Mission has 
fallen on such bad times that it is forced to advocate a scheme by which its 
wards or their representatives will be bounden slaves of their past masters. 
The masters and the mission have thus met and evolved a scheme which 
will keep the Depressed classes eternally depressed without any hope of 
deliverance. Such tactics do not deceive the untouchables ignorant as they 
are ; much less will they deceive the Franchise Committee. From another 
point of view the scheme of the Mission is unacceptable. It is aggravating to 
see the Mission proposing a scheme for the representation of the untouchables 
while persistently refusing to admit an untouchable in its governing council. 
Interested and officious as it is, its scheme must be rejected.
37. Nomination even though by Government in itself to be preferred to the 
former kind of nomination, is to be objected to from the stand-point of the 
untouchables. Apart from restricting the freedom of the representatives it 
fails to give political education which is the urgent need of all communities, 
much more of the untouchables.
