 
MAHARASHTRA AS A LINGUISTIC PROVINCE
119
settlement in Bombay. Who built up the trade and industry of Bombay 
is a matter for which no very great research is necessary. There is no 
foundation in fact for the statement that the trade and industry of 
Bombay was built up by Gujarathis. It was built up by Europeans and 
not by Gujarathis. Those who assert that it is the Gujarathis who did it 
should consult the Times of India Directory before making such a claim. 
The Gujarathis have been just merchants which is quite a different thing 
from being industrialists.
37. Once it is established that Bombay belonged to Maharashtra the claim 
of Maharashtra to include Bombay cannot be defeated by the argument 
that the trade and industry of Bombay is owned by the Gujarathis. The 
claim of mortgagor to his land cannot be defeated by the mortgagee on 
the ground that the mortgagee has built up permanent structures on the 
land. The Gujarathis assuming they have built up the trade and industry 
of Bombay are in no better position than a mortgagee is.
38. But who have built up the trade and industry of Bombay seems to 
me quite irrelevant to the decision of the issue whether Bombay should or 
should not be included in Maharashtra. This argument based on monopoly 
of trade and industry is really a political argument. It means that the 
owners may rule the workers but the workers must not be allowed to 
rule the owners. Those who use this argument do not seem to know what 
they are up against. The one thing they are up against is whether this 
argument is to be confined only to the City of Bombay or whether it is 
to have a general application.
39. There is no reason why it should not have a general application. 
For just as in Bombay City society is divided into owners and workers 
or into capitalists and wage-earners, such also is the case of society in 
Gujarat or for the matter of that in every province of India. If the owners 
and capitalists of Bombay are to be protected by the exclusion of Bombay 
from Maharashtra because Maharashtrians belong to the working classes, 
what is the method they suggest for protecting the capitalists of Gujarat 
from the working classes of Gujarat. Those Gujarathi Professors like Vakils 
and Dantwalas who are searching their brains to supply arguments to 
the Gujarathi capitalists of Bombay have not thought of finding ways 
and means for protecting the Gujarathi capitalists of Gujarat against 
the working classes of Gujarat. The only remedy they can suggest is the 
abandonment of adult suffrage. That is the only way by which they can 
protect the capitalists if they are out to protect capitalists in general and 
not the Gujarathi capitalists of Bombay in particular.
40. There is however one argument which the Professors could urge. It is 
that the Maharashtrians being in a majority would discriminate against the 
Gujarathi capitalists of Bombay if Bombay was included in Maharashtra.
