RANADE, GANDHI AND JINNAH
I
I must tell you that I am not very happy over this invitation. My fear is 
that I may not be able to do justice to the occasion. When a year ago the 
Centenary of Ranade’s Birthday was celebrated in Bombay, the Rt. Hon’ble 
Srinivas Shastri was chosen to speak. For very many reasons he was 
well-qualified for performing the duty. He can claim to be a contemporary 
of Ranade for a part of his life. He had seen him at close range and was 
an eye witness of the work to which Ranade devoted his life. He had 
opportunity to judge him and compare him with his co-workers. He could 
therefore expound his views about Ranade with a sense of confidence 
and with intimacy born out of personal touch. He could cite an anecdote 
and illuminate the figure of Ranade before his audience. None of these 
qualifications are available to me. My connection with Ranade is of the 
thinnest. I had not even seen him. There are only two incidents about 
Ranade which I can recall. First relates to his death. I was a student in 
the first standard in the Satara High School. On the 16th January 1901 
the High School was closed and we boys had a holiday. We asked why it 
was closed and we were told that because Ranade was dead. I was then 
about 9 years old. I knew nothing about Ranade, who he was, what he 
had done ; like other boys I was happy over the holiday and did not care 
to know who died. The second incident which reminds me of Ranade is 
dated much later than the first. Once I was examining some bundles of 
old papers belonging to my father when I found in them a paper which 
purported to be a petition sent by the Commissioned and non-Commissioned 
officers of the Mahar Community to the Government of India against 
the orders issued in 1892 banning the recruitment of the Mahars in the 
Army. On inquiry I was told that this was a copy of a petition which was 
drafted by Ranade to help the aggrieved Mahars to obtain redress. Beyond 
these two incidents I have nothing to recall of Ranade. My knowledge 
about him is wholly impersonal. It is derived from what I have read about
