 
MAHARASHTRA AS A LINGUISTIC PROVINCE
105
 
 Province its official language. For, the cultural unity of the Province, 
which already exists, is capable of being sustained by factors other 
than language such as common historic tradition, community of 
social customs, etc. To sustain Provincial cultural unity which 
already exists it does not require the use of the Provincial language 
for official purposes. Fortunately for the Provincialists there 
is no fear of a Maharashtrian not remaining a Maharashtrian 
because he spoke any other language. So also there is no fear of 
a Tamilian or an Andhra or a Bengali ceasing to be a Tamilian, 
Andhra or Bengali if he spoke any other language than his own 
mother-tongue.
 (2) The out-and-out advocates of Linguistic Provinces would no doubt 
protest that they have no intention of converting the Provinces 
into separate nations. Their bona fides need not be doubted. At 
the same time, it often happens that things do take a shape which 
their authors never intended. It is therefore absolutely necessary 
to take from the very beginning every step to prevent things 
taking an evil shape in course of time. There is therefore nothing 
wrong if the loc ening of the ties in one direction is accompanied 
by their being tightened up in another direction.
 (3) We must not allow the Provincial language to become its official 
language even if it was natural that the Provincial language should 
be the official language of the Province. There is no danger in 
creating Linguistic Provinces. Danger lies in creating Linguistic 
Provinces with the language of each Province as its official language. 
The latter would lead to the creation of Provincial nationalities. 
For the use of the Provincial languages as official languages would 
lead Provincial cultures to be isolated crystalized, hardened and 
solidified. It would be fatal to allow this to happen. To allow 
this is to allow the Provinces to become independent nations, 
separate in everything and thus open the road to the ruination of 
United India. In Linguistic Provinces without the language of the 
Province being made its official language the Provincial culture 
would remain fluid with a channel open for give and take. Under 
no circumstances, we must allow the Linguistic Provinces to make 
their Provincial languages their official languages.
11. The imposition of an All-India official language on a Linguistic 
Province which may happen to be different from the language of the 
Province cannot come in the way of maintaining Provincial culture. Official 
language will be used only in the field occupied by Government. The non-
official field or what may be the purely cultural field will still remain 
open to the Provincial language to play its part. There may be a healthy 
competition between the official and non-official language. One may try to
