282
 
PREFACE
is concerned, the generality of the Indian public seems to be living in 
a fog. Beyond the fact that there is to be a Federation and that the 
Federation is a bad thing the general public has no clear conception 
of what is the nature of this Federation and is, therefore, unable to 
form an intelligent opinion about it. It is necessary that the general 
public should have in its hand a leaflet containing an outline of the 
Federal structure and a criticism of that structure in small compass 
sufficient to convey a workable understanding of the Scheme. I feel 
this Tract will supply this need.
I also think that the publication of this tract will be regarded as 
timely. Federation is a very live issue and it is also a very urgent 
one. Soon the people of British India will be called upon to decide 
whether they should accept the Federal Scheme or they should not. 
The premier political organization in this Country, namely, the 
Congress seems to be willing to accept this Federation as it has 
accepted Provincial Autonomy. The negotiations that are going on 
with the Muslim League and the manoeuvres that are being carried 
on with the Indian States give me at any rate the impression that 
the Congress is prepared to accept the Federation and that these 
negotiations and manoeuvres are designed to bring about a working 
arrangement with other parties so that with their help the Congress 
may be in the saddle at the Centre as it has been in the Provinces. 
Mr. Subhas Chandra Bose has even gone to the length of suggesting 
that the right wing of the Congress has committed itself to this 
Federation so far that it has already selected its cabinet. It matters 
not whether all this is true or not. I hope all this is untrue. Be that 
as it may, the matter is both grave and urgent, and I think all those 
who have anything to say on the subject should speak it out. Indeed 
I feel that silence at such a time will be criminal. That is why I have 
hastened to publish my address. I believe that I have views on the 
subject of Federation which even if they do not convince others will 
at least provoke them to think
1-3-39 
B. R. AMBEDKAR
Rajgraha
Dadar, Bombay 14  
