212
 
DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES
his work and what others have said about him. You must not expect me 
to say anything of a personal character which will either interest, you or 
instruct you. I propose to say what I think of him as a public-man in his 
days and his place in Indian politics today.
II
As you are well aware, there are friends of Ranade who do not hesitate 
to describe him as a great man and there are others who with equal 
insistance deny him that place. Where does the truth lie? But this question 
must, I think, wait upon another, namely, is history the biography of great 
men ? The question is both relevant as well as important. For, if great 
men were not the makers of history, there is no reason why we should 
take more notice of them than we do of cinema stars. Views differ. There 
are those who assert that however great a man may be, he is a creature of 
Time—Time called him forth, Time did everything, he did nothing. Those 
who hold this view, in my judgment, wrongly interpret history. There have 
been three different views on the causes of historical changes. We have 
had the Augustinian theory of history, according to which history is only 
an unfolding of a divine plan in which mankind is to continue through war 
and suffering until that divine plan is completed at the day of judgment. 
There is the view of Buckle who held that history was made by Geography 
and Physics. Karl Marx propounded a third view. According to him history 
was the result of economic forces. None of these three would admit that 
history is the biography of great men. Indeed they deny man any place in 
the making of history. No one except theologians accepts the Augustinian 
theory of history. As to Buckle and Marx, while there is truth in what they 
say, their views do not represent the whole truth. They are quite wrong 
in holding that impersonal forces are everything and that man is no factor 
in the making of history. That impersonal forces are a determining factor 
cannot be denied. But that the effect of impersonal forces depends on man 
must also be admitted. Flint may not exist everywhere. But where it does 
exist, it needs man to strike flint against flint to make fire. Seeds may not 
be found everywhere. But where they do exist, it needs man to ground it 
to powder and make it a delectable and nutritious paste and thereby lay 
the foundation of agriculture. There are many areas devoid of metals. But 
where they do exist, it needs a man to make instruments and machines 
which are the basis of civilization and culture.
Take the case of social forces. Various tragic situations arise. One such 
situation is of the type described by Thayer in his biography of Theodore 
Roosevelt when he says :
“There comes a time in every sect, party or institution when it stops 
growing, its arteries harden, its young men see no visions, its old men 
dream no dreams ; it lives on the past and desperately tries to perpetuate
