249
 
EVIDENCE BEFORE THE SOUTHBOROUGH COMMITTEE
a common understanding ; or to use the language of the Sociologists, 
they must be like-minded. But how do they come to have these things in 
common or how do they become like-minded ? Certainly, not by sharing 
with another as one would do in the case of a piece of cake. To cultivate 
an attitude similar to others or to be like-minded with others is to be in 
communication with them or to participate in their activity. Persons do not 
become like-minded by merely living in physical proximity, any more than 
they cease to be like-minded by being distant from each other. Participation 
in a group is the only way of being like-minded with the group. Each group 
tends to create its own distinctive type of like-mindedness, but where there 
are more groups than one to be brought into political union, there would 
be conflict among the differently like-minded. And so long as the groups 
remain isolated the conflict is bound to continue and prevent the harmony 
of action. It is the isolation of the groups that is the chief evil. Where the 
groups allow of endosmosis they cease to be evil. For endosmosis among 
the groups makes possible a resocialization of once socialized attitudes. In 
place of the old, it creates a new like-mindedness, which is representative 
of the interests, aims, and aspirations of all the various groups concerned. 
Like-mindedness is essential for an harmonious life, social or political and, 
as has just been shown, it depends upon the extent of communication, 
participation or endosmosis. Applying this test to the divisions in India, 
we must pronounce upon them as constituting an obstacle in the path of 
realizing an harmonious political life.
5. The groups or divisions each with its set like-mindedness that are sure 
to be in conflict may be given as follows : 
 (1) Hindus; 
 (2) Mohammedans ;
 (3) Christians ;
 (4) Parsees;
 (5) Jews, etc.
Except the Hindus the rest of the divisions are marked by such complete 
freedom of communication from within that we may expect their members 
to be perfectly like-minded with respect to one another. Regarding the 
Hindus, however, the analysis must be carried on a little farther. The 
significant fact about the Hindus is that before they are Hindus they are 
members of some caste. The castes are so exclusive and isolated that the 
consciousness of being a Hindu would be the chief guide of a Hindu’s 
activity towards non-Hindu. But as against a Hindu of a different caste 
his caste-consciousness would be the chief guide of activity. From this, it is 
plain that as between two Hindus, caste-like-mindedness is more powerful 
than the like-mindedness due to their both being Hindus. Thus from within 
the Hindus, as from without, there is likely to be a conflict of like-minded 
persons. There are some who argue that this conflict runs through the whole
