269
 
EVIDENCE BEFORE THE SOUTHBOROUGH COMMITTEE
relations of the future. It is happy to note that the pronouncement of the 
20th August 1917 declared the application of the principle to India — a 
principle which enunciates the rule that every people must be free to 
determine the conditions under which it is to live. It would be a sign of 
imperfect realization of the significance of this principle if its application were 
restricted to international relations, because discord does not exist between 
nations alone, but there is also discord between classes from within a nation. 
Wittingly our Indian politicians in their political speeches and harangues 
hold to the de jure conception of the Indian people. By the de jure conception 
they conceive of the Indian people as by nature one and emphasize the 
qualities such as praiseworthy community of purpose and welfare, loyalty 
to public ends and mutuality of sympathy which accompany this unity. How 
the de jure and de facto conceptions conflict, it is hoped, the committee will 
not fail to realize. As an instance the following may be noted. The moral 
evil to the Indian people of their conquest and subjugation by the British 
is a theme which is very attractive to the Brahmin politicians, who never 
fail to make capital out of it. The moral evils were once portrayed by John 
Shore in his “Notes on Indian Affairs” written in 1832. The late Honourable 
Mr. Gokhale once voiced the same feeling when speaking about the “excessive 
costliness of the foreign agency”. He said :
“There is a moral evil which, if anything, is even greater. A kind of dwarfing 
or stunting of the Indian race is going on under the present system. We must 
live all the days of our life in an atmosphere of inferiority and the tallest 
of us must bend, in order that the exigencies of the existing system may be 
satisfied. The upward impulse, if I may use such an expression, which every 
schoolboy at Eton and Harrow may feel, that he may one day be a Gladstone 
or Napoleon or a Wellington, and which may draw forth the best efforts of 
which he is capable, is denied to us. The full height to which our manhood is 
capable of rising can never be reached by us under the present system. The 
moral elevation which every self-governing people feel cannot be felt by us. Our 
administrative and military talents must gradually disappear, owing to sheer 
disuse till at last our lot as hewers of wood and drawers of water in our own 
country, is stereotyped.”.
45. I beg to invite the attention of the Committee whether these sentiments 
which have been voiced by a Brahmin (a noble Brahmin to be sure) to the 
disgrace of the British bureaucracy cannot be more fittingly voiced by the 
untouchables to the disgrace of the Brahmin oligarchy? May it be said to 
the credit of the bureaucracy, that it has disproved the charge of being 
wooden and shown itself susceptible to feeling by proposing changes in the 
system of the Government which has dwarfed the personality of those for 
whom it was devised. But can the oligarchy claim anything half as noble? 
Their belief is that the Hindu social system has been perfected for all time
