164
 
DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES
How to dispose of the remainder when Bombay is separated is the next 
question. The remainder consists of two parts : (1) Gujarath, (2) Maharashtra.
I am concerned with Maharashtra.
While creating Linguistic Provinces the Commission has given over 
Marathi-speaking areas to non-Marathi-speaking areas. The number of such 
excluded areas are as follows :
 1. Belgaum Taluka with the City of Belgaum.
 2. Khanapur Taluka.
 3. Chikori Taluka including Nipani.
 4. Supa Taluka.
 5. Karwar Taluka.
 6. Nilanga Taluka in Bidar.
 7. Ahamadpur Taluka in Bidar.
 8. Udgir Taluka in Bidar.
 9. Rajgir Taluka in Adilabad.
 10. Some portion from Vidarbha given to the neighbouring Hindi-speaking 
State.
The Maharashtrians excluded from Maharashtra come to 13,89,648 in 
terms of population.
The Commission in retaining the mixed State of Bombay had to secure 
two most important objects. One is not to allow Bombay to go into the hands 
of Maharashtrians. This the Commission did by creating a mixed State. The 
second thing they had to do was to secure equality between Maharashtrians 
and the Gujarathis. The necessity of equality between the two in the future 
Legislature of the Bombay State as planned by the Commission had become 
urgent as the members of Karnatak in the old Assembly on whom the 
Gujarathis depended for their majority were to disappear in the new Karnatak 
State. This the Commission did by clipping the wings of Maharashtra by 
handing over Marathi-speaking people to non-Marathi-speaking States. There 
seems to be no other reason for this political vandalism.
This wrong done by the Commission to Maharashtra must now be remedied 
and fortunately it can be undone. The proposal of a mixed State is gone and 
there is no necessity for equality between Maharashtrians and Gujarathis.
CHAPTER 8
SUMMARY OF PRINCIPLES GOVERNING THE ISSUE
For the sake of the reader I summarize below the principles which should 
underly the creation of Linguistic States which are already enunciated in
