216
 
DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES
learning, the breadth of his wisdom and the length of his vision. There 
was no subject which he did not touch and in which he did not acquire 
profundity. His reading was on the scale of the colossal and every inch 
he was a scholar. He was great not merely by the standard of his Time, 
but he was great— measured by any standard. As I have said no claim 
for being a great man can rest on the foundation of sincerity and intellect 
either singly or in combination. Ranade could not be called great if he had 
these two qualities and no more. His title to being a great man must rest 
upon the social purposes he served and on the way he served them. On 
that there can be no doubt. Ranade is known more as a social reformer 
than as a historian, economist or educationist. His whole life is nothing 
but a relentless campaign for social reform. It is on his role as a social 
reformer that this title to being a great man rests. Ranade had both the 
vision and the courage which the reformer needs, and in the circumstances 
in which he was born his vision was no small a virtue than his courage. 
That he developed a vision of the Prophet—I am using the word in the 
Jewish sense—cannot but be regarded as a matter of surprise if the time 
in which he was born is taken into account. Ranade was born in 1842 some 
24 years after the battle of Kirkee which brought the Maratha Empire to an 
end. The downfall of the Maratha Empire evoked different feelings among 
different people. There were men like Natu who served as accessories before 
the fact. There were some who played the part of accessories after the fact, 
inasmuch as they were happy that the cursed rule of the Brahmin Peshwa 
was brought to an end. But there can be no doubt that a large majority of 
the people of Maharashtra were stunned by the event. When the whole of 
India was enveloped by the advancing foreign horde and its people being 
subjugated piece by piece, here in this little corner of Maharashtra lived a 
sturdy race who knew what liberty was, who had fought for it inch by inch 
and established it over miles and miles. By the British conquest they had 
lost what was to them a most precious possession. One can quite imagine 
how the best intellect of Maharashtra had its mind utterly confounded and 
its horizon fully and completely darkened. What could be the natural reaction 
to so great a catastrophe? Can it be other than resignation, defeatism and 
surrender to the inevitable? How did Ranade react? Very differently. He held 
out the hope that the fallen shall rise. Indeed he developed a new faith on 
which this hope was founded. Let me quote his own words. He said :
“I profess implicit faith in two articles of my creed. This country of ours is 
the true land of promise. This race of ours is the chosen race.”
He did not rest quiet by merely enunciating this new Mosaic Gospel of 
hope and confidence. He applied his mind to the question of the realization 
of this hope. The first requisite was of course a dispassionate analysis of the 
causes of this downfall. Ranade realized that the downfall was due to certain 
weaknesses in the Hindu social system and unless these weaknesses were
