SMALL HOLDINGS IN INDIA AND THEIR REMEDIES
463
Another method of dealing with the problem is advocated by the Hon. 
Mr. G. F. Keatinge, Director of Agriculture, Bombay Presidency. In the 
Statement of Objects and Reasons appended to his draft bill he says :
“4………………. . The object of this bill is to enable such landowners 
as may wish to do so to check the further sub-division of their lands 
and to enable them, when it is otherwise possible, to effect a permanent 
consolidation of their holdings; and also to enable the executive 
government to secure the same results in respect of unoccupied land. 
The legislation proposed is purely enabling, and it will be operative 
in the case of any holding only upon the expressed wish of any person 
possessing an interest in that holding.
“5. The scheme embodied in this bill for securing these objects is 
briefly as follows. In order to be constituted an economic holding a plot 
of land must be entered as such in a register prescribed by rules. If 
the land is occupied, it will rest with some person having an interest 
in the land to make an application to the Collector to have the land 
registered as an economic holding…………. . Unless the Collector 
considers that there are sufficient grounds for rejecting the application, 
he holds a careful enquiry in which he follows a procedure similar to 
that prescribed in the Land Acquisition Act, 1894. If the proceedings 
show that all persons interested agree, the land is registered. Land 
vesting absolutely in Government may be registered without inquiry. 
The holding must in any case be registered in one name only, and the 
act of registration annuls all the interest of all other persons, except 
the registered owner, in the holding. Thereafter the owner cannot 
divide the plot but must so long as he owns it, keep it entire. He 
may sell, mortgage or otherwise dispose of it as an entire unit, but 
not dispose of part of it or do anything that might result in splitting 
up the holding. On the death of the holder, if he has not disposed of 
the land by will it will devolve upon a single heir. If the provisions of 
the bill are contravened (for instance if the holder mortgages a part 
of his holding and the mortgagee obtains a decree for possession), the 
Collector is empowered to send a certificate to the Court, and the 
Court will set aside its decree or order. The Collector may also evict a 
person in wrongful possession. When a plot has been once constituted 
an economic holding, the registration cannot be cancelled except with 
the consent of the Collector; the grounds on which cancellation will 
be allowed, will be laid down by rule and it is proposed that it shall 
be permitted chiefly in cases where economic considerations indicate 
that it is expedient.”
Summing up this discussion of the two issues of consolidation, it must be 
said that the problem has not been viewed as a whole by all its advocates. 
The Baroda Committee alone endeavours to consolidate as well as to preserve
