468
 
DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES
economic production and which no producer can hope to ignore with 
impunity.18
Bringing to bear the above remarks regarding production on the definition 
of an economic holding, we can postulate that if agriculture is to be treated 
as an economic enterprise, then, by itself, there could be no such thing as 
a large or a small holding. To a farmer a holding is too small or too large 
for the other factors of production at his disposal necessary for carrying on 
the cultivation of his holding as an economic enterprise. Mere size of land 
is empty of all economic connotation. Consequently, it cannot possibly be the 
language of economic science to say that a large holding is economic while 
a small holding is uneconomic. It is the right or wrong proportion of other 
factors of production to a unit of land that renders the latter economic or 
uneconomic. Thus a small farm may be economic as well as a large farm ; 
for, economic or uneconomic does not depend upon the size of land but upon 
the due proportion among all the factors including land.
An economic holding, therefore, if it is not to be a hollow concept, consists 
in a combination of land, capital and labour, etc., in a proportion such that 
the pro rata contribution of each in conjunction with the rest is the highest. 
In other words to create an economic holding it will not do for a farmer solely 
to manipulate his piece of land. He must also have the other instruments 
of production required for the efficient cultivation of his holding and must 
maintain a due proportion of all the factors for, without it, there can be no 
efficient production. If his equipment shrinks, his holding must also shrink. 
If his equipment augments, his holding must also augment. The point is 
that his equipment and his holding must not be out of proportion to each 
other. They must be in proportion and must vary, if need be, in proportion.
The line of argument followed above is not without support from actual 
practice. It is happy from an economist’s point of view, to find it recognized 
and adopted in India itself by the fathers of the Survey and Settlement 
System in the Bombay Presidency. The famous Joint Report (1840) contains 
an illuminating discussion of the problem. The question before the officers 
deputed to introduce the Survey System in the Deccan was how to levy 
the assessment. Was it to be a field assessment or an assessment to 
be placed on the whole lands of the village or on the entire holdings of 
individuals or co-parceners, whether proprietors or occupants. That after
 18. Some economists who hold that it is the law of Diminishing Returns that governs 
agricultural production will demur to the universal applicability that is claimed for the 
Law of Proportion. Briefly stated the Law of Dininishing Returns asserts that additional 
‘doses’ of capital and labour administered to a given piece of land will be responded to 
by a less and less yield. This means that if only the non-land expense of production is 
doubled there results less than a doubled product. But if this is the fact that is intended 
to be generallised by the Law of Diminishing Returns then there is nothing in it that is 
peculiar to agricultural production. If’ the expense to the land be doubled but the land not 
doubled it is certain that the extra return will fall short of the increased expense. This 
is simply another way of saying that if the returns are to grow all the factors must be 
increased in proportion. But so stated is not the Law of Diminishing Returns a confused 
version of the Law of Proportion?
