384
 
PREFACE
the tyranny and discrimination of the majority. The other 
interpretation is that the Scheduled Castes differ from a minority 
and therefore they are not entitled to the protection which can 
be claimed by a minority. This interpretation appears to be such 
unmitigated nonsense that no sane man need pay any attention to 
it. The Scheduled Castes must be excused if they ignore it. Those 
who accept my interpretation of the view that the Scheduled Castes 
are not a minority will, I am sure, agree with me that I am justified 
in demanding for the Scheduled Castes, all the benefit of the 
Fundamental Rights of citizens, all the benefit of the Provisions for 
the Protection of the minorities and in addition special Safeguards.
The memorandum was intended to be submitted to the Constituent 
Assembly. There was no intention to issue it to the public. But 
my caste Hindu friends who have had the opportunity to read the 
typescript have pressed me to give it a wider circulation. Although 
it is meant for members of the Constituent Assembly, I do not see 
any breach of decorum in making it available to the general public. 
I have therefore agreed to fall in line with their wishes.
Instead of setting out my ideas in general terms, I have drafted 
the Memorandum in the form of Articles of the Constitution. I am 
sure that for the sake of giving point and precision this method 
will be found to be more helpful. For the benefit of the Working 
Committee of the Scheduled Castes Federation, I had prepared certain 
explanatory notes and other statistical material. As the notes and 
the statistical material are likely to be useful to the general reader, 
I have thought it better to print them along with the Memorandum 
rather than keep them back.
Among the many problems the Constituent Assembly has to 
face, there are two which are admittedly most difficult. One is 
the problem of the Minorities and the other is the problem of 
the Indian States. I have been a student of the problem of the 
Indian States and I hold some very definite and distinct views 
on the subject. It was my hope that the Constituent Assembly 
would elect me to the States Committee Evidently, it has found 
men of superior calibre for the work. It may also be because I 
am one of those who are outside the tabernacle and therefore 
undesirable. I am not sorry to find myself left out. My only regret 
is that I have lost an opportunity to which I was looking forward
