MR. RUSSELL AND THE RECONSTRUCTION OF SOCIETY
485
than for a nation in which all impulse is dead. Impulse is the expression of 
life and while it exists, there is hope of its turning towards life instead of 
towards death ; but lack of impulse is death, and out of death no new life 
will come.”6 He further acknowledges that “a great many of the impulses 
which now lead nations to go to war are themselves essential to any 
vigorous or progressive life. Without imagination and love of adventure a 
society becomes stagnant and begins to decay. Conflict, provided it is not 
destructive and brutal, is necessary in order to stimulate men’s activities 
and to secure the victory of what is living over what is dead and merely 
traditional. The wish for the triumph of one’s cause, the sense of solidarity 
with large bodies of men, are not things which a wise man will wish to 
destroy. It is only the outcome in death and destruction and hatred that 
is evil. The problem is to keep these impulses without making war the 
outlet for them.”7
The gist of it all is that activity is the condition of growth. Mr. Russell, 
it must be emphasized, is against war but is not for quieticism ; for, 
according to him, activity leads to growth and quieticism is but another 
name for death. To express it in the language of Professor Dewey he is 
only against “force as violence” but is all for “force as energy.” It must 
be remembered by those who are opposed to force that without the use 
of it all ideals will remain empty just as without some ideal or purpose 
(conscious or otherwise) all activity will be no more than mere fruitless 
fooling. Ends and means (= force in operation) are therefore concomitants 
and the common adage that the end justifies the means contains a profound 
truth which is perverted simply because it is misunderstood. For if the 
end does not justify the means what else will? The difficulty is that we 
do not sufficiently control the operations of the means once employed for 
the achieving of some end. For a means when once employed liberates 
many ends—a fact scarcely recognised—and not the one only we wish it to 
produce. However, in our fanaticism for achievement we attach the article 
“the” to the end we cherish and pay no heed to the ends simultaneously 
liberated. Of course for the exigencies of an eminently practical life we 
must set an absolute value on some one end. But in doing this we must 
take precaution that the other ends involved are not sacrificed. Thus, the 
problem is that if we are to use force, as we must, to achieve something, 
we must see that while working for one end we do not destroy, in the 
process, other ends equally worthy of maintenance. Applying this to the 
present war, no justification. I think, is needed for the use of force. What 
needs to the justified is the destructive violence. The justification must 
satisfy the world that the ends given prominence to by one or other of
6. Principles of Social Reconstruction, p. 21.
7. Ibid., p. 93.
