162
 
DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES
I am greatly worried about Marathwada. It was hitherto part of the Nizam’s 
Territory for the last 200 years. The Nizam had criminally neglected this 
area. He took no interest in it. There is not a mile of canal irrigation in 
Marathwada. There is hardly a high school in taluka places in Marathwada. 
There is hardly a youth in Nizam’s public service from Marathwada. I speak 
from knowledge and experience. People are not only down and out they 
are ignorant. They are being grabbed by highly advanced people on both 
sides. When their avenues of employment are closed there will be further 
degradation in their position.
I shudder to think what would happen when Marathwada goes under the 
Poona University. The standard of education in the schools and colleges under 
the Poona University is so high that hardly any boy from Marathwada can 
hope to pass the examination. It is quite possible that with the madness for 
united Maharashtra there will develop a madness for a single and common 
University.
The creation of United Maharashtra will be followed by the onrush of 
Poona and Nagpur Brahmins in Marathwada to pick up the jobs.
There is a further reason why Maharashtra should be divided into three.
The total strength of the Bombay Legislative Assembly is 315. Out of 
them 149 members are Marathi-speaking. The total strength of the Bombay 
Legislative Council is 72 ; out of them 34 are Marathi-speaking. Obviously 
some Marathi-speaking person should have been the Chief Minister of the 
Bombay State. Mr. Hirey stood up as a candidate for the Chief Ministership. 
But he was made to sit down by the Congress High Command. Not 
only was Mr. Hirey made to sit down but he was forced to move that 
Mr. Morarji Desai be made the Chief Minister. What a humiliation for a 
Maharashtrian leader ! And what value does the Congress High Command 
attach to the political intelligence of Maharashtrians ?
The same incapacity of the Maratha Ministers is clear from the division 
of subjects referred earlier.
It is obvious from the facts given above that the Marathas are lacking 
in political talent. There is no man of eminence among them such as Tilak, 
or Gokhale or Ranade. The Maharashtrian today counts for nothing. The 
Congress Maharashtrian counts for much less in the Congress. The non-
Congress Maharashtrian also counts for nothing. It is therefore absolutely 
essential to train up Maharashtrians in political life. This political training 
has become fundamental because of the transfer of power to the masses. The 
word Marathas is used in two senses. In one sense it means all those who 
speak the Marathi language. In another sense it means all those who are 
Marathas by caste. They are all spoken of as Marathas. But they all fail to 
make the distinction between Marathas i.e. those who speak the Marathi 
language and Marathas i.e. those who are Marathas by caste.
