307
 
FEDERATION VERSUS FREEDOM
Government in the matter of the exercise of their executive authority. That 
difference will be clear if you will compare section 126 with section 128.
Section 126 enacts that the executive authority of every province shall 
be exercised as not to impede or prejudice the exercise of the executive 
authority of the Federation and the executive authority of the Federation 
shall extend to the giving of such directions to a Province as may appear 
to the Federal Government to be necessary for that purpose. Section 128 
is a section which enacts a similar rule with respect to a Federated State, 
but there is a significant difference between the two sections. Section 126 
says that the executive authority of the Federation extends to the giving of 
such directions to a province as may appear to the Federal Government to 
be necessary for that purpose, while section 128 does not give such a power. 
That means that the Federation does not possess the inherent executive 
authority to give a direction to the Ruler of a Federated State to prevent 
him from so exercising the executive authority of the State as to impede 
or prejudice the exercise of the executive authority of the Federation. That 
is one very significant difference. Such authority, instead of being given to 
the Federation, is given to the Governor-General, who, of course, under the 
law is distinct from the Federal Government and it is the Governor-General 
who is empowered to issue such directions to the Ruler as he thinks fit. 
A further distinction is also noticeable. When directions are issued to the 
Governor of a province under section 126 he is bound to carry them out. He 
has no right to question the necessity of the directions nor can he question 
the capacity of the Governor-General to issue such directions. With regard 
to the Ruler of a State, however, the position is entirely different. He can 
question such a direction, and have the matter adjudicated in the Federal 
Court, because the proviso to sub-section 2 of section 128 says that if any 
question arises under this section as to whether the executive authority 
under this section of the Federation is exercisable in a State with respect 
to any matter or as to the extent to which it is so exercisable, the question 
may at the instance either of the Federation or the Ruler be referred to the 
Federal Court for determination by that Court.
(3) In the matter of Finance
Coming to the question of Finance, the disparity between the Provinces 
and the States is a glaring disparity. Take the case of the taxing authority 
of the Federation over the Provinces and the States. It may be noted that 
the revenues of the Federation are derivable from sources which fall under 
two main heads—those derived from taxation and those not derived from 
taxation. Those not derived from taxation fall under six heads—
 (1) Fees in respect of matters included in the Federal List.
 (2) Profits, if any, on the work of the Postal Services, including Postal 
Savings Banks.
 (3) Profits, if any, on the operation of Federal Railways.
