SMALL HOLDINGS IN INDIA AND THEIR REMEDIES
461
value of his old small and scattered field. In this way the previous sub-
divisions together with their attendant evils totally disappear.”7 
Regarding consolidation, Prof. H. S. Jevons says:
“The principles which should guide the choice of a method of carrying 
out the re-organization of villages on the lines above described are the 
following. In the first place compulsion should be avoided as far as 
possible and the principle adopted that no charge should be imposed 
upon any area unless the owners of more than one-half of that area 
desire the change. Should this condition be satisfied for an area……. .it 
would seem expedient that legal power should be taken to compel the 
minority to accept the redistribution of holdings under the supervision 
of Government. In the second place………….the expense of the operation 
should be kept as low as possible………In the third place considerable 
elasticity should be permitted in the methods of carrying through 
the re-organization in the different places during the first few years, 
as the whole undertaking would be in an experimental stage so that 
different methods might be tried, and the best be ultimately selected 
for a permanent set of regulations. Fourthly, the possible necessity for 
a considerable change of the existing tenancy law in the re-organised 
villages must be faced………. .. .For the sake of completeness I may 
add as a fifth principle the obvious condition that redistribution of land 
must be made upon the most equitable basis possible, and that liberal 
compensation should be given to those, if any, who may be excluded 
from a former cultivating ownership.” 8
As for procedure in the compulsory consolidation of holdings both 
Prof. Jevons and the Baroda Committee propose the appointment of 
Commissioners to hear applications for consolidation and to carry it out, 
leaving to any objector the right to petition the Court to stay the proceedings 
in case he felt that an injustice was being done to him.
The problem of perpetuating such a consolidated holding will next demand 
the care of the legislator. It is accepted without question by many that the 
law of inheritance that prevails among the Hindus and the Mohomedans 
is responsible for the sub-division of land. On the death of a Hindu or a 
Mahomedan his heirs are entitled without let or hindrance to equal shares 
in the property of the deceased. Now a consolidated holding subject to the 
operation of such a law of inheritance will certainly not endure for long. 
It will be the task of Sisyphus over again if, after consolidation, the law 
of inheritance were to remain unaltered.
7. R. B.C. . p. 35.
8. The Consolidation of Agicultural Holdings in the United Provinces, 1918, pp. 45-46. 
The author is grateful to Prof. Jevons for a copy.
