250
 
DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES
gamut of the caste system. But this is protesting too much. From the point of 
view of communication the Hindus, in spite of castes, divide themselves into 
two significant groups—the touchables and the untouchables. The touchables 
have enough communication between them to enable us to say that the 
conflict of like-mindedness so far as they are concerned is not much to be 
dreaded. But there is a real difference and consequent conflict between the 
like-mindedness of the touchables and the untouchables. Untouchability is 
the strongest ban on the endosmosis between them. Their complete isolation 
accounts for the acuteness of the difference of like-mindedness.
The real social divisions of India then are :
 (1) Touchable Hindus.
 (2) Untouchable Hindus.
 (3) Mohammedans.
 (4) Christians.
 (5) Parsees.
 (6) Jews.
6. It will not do good to ignore these real divisions in devising a system 
of policy, if the policy is to take the form of popular Government. But if the 
success of popular Government depends upon how well the constituencies 
and franchises transmit the social forces and how well they secure personal 
representation ; we must first study the form which the conflict between 
these groups will assume in an election.
7. In a territorial constituency, which will group together voters 
belonging to the above groups, a majority of votes will declare a candidate 
to be a representative for the constituency in question. Now the question 
arises : is such a candidate, a true representative of the groups, covered 
by the territorial constituency ? Is he a true mirror of the mind of the 
constituency ? Is he a representative of all the interests in the constituency ? 
To be concrete, will a Hindu candidate represent Mohammedan interests ? 
At this stage it must be recalled that the various divisions described above 
are held together by a community of interests which are non-secular or 
purely religious. We cannot say that each division is held together by a 
community of interests which are secular or material. If so, then for secular 
purposes the groups will be broken up. From the point of view of material 
interests, there are no such people as Mohammedans, Parsees, Hindus, etc. 
There will be in each of these groups landlords, labourers, capitalists, free 
traders, protectionists, etc., each of the groups having community of interests 
which are material will be composed of Hindus, Mohammedans, Parsees, 
etc. Consequently, a Hindu candidate can very well represent the material 
interests of the Mohammedans and vice versa. There is thus no conflict of 
material interest in the main among the communities as such. If we suppose 
that religious interests in future will occupy a subordinate place in the
