223
 
RANADE, GANDHI AND JINNAH
between the privileged and the unprivileged. Unfortunately, the opponents 
of Ranade were never able to realize the truth of this fact.
One may judge it by any test and it will be found that the stand that 
Ranade took in this controversy and his plan of work were correct and 
fundamental to if they were not the pre-requisites of political reform. 
Ranade argued that there were no rights in the Hindu society which the 
moral sense of man could recognize. There were privileges and disabilities, 
privileges for a few and disabilities for a vast majority. Ranade struggled to 
create rights. Ranade wanted to vitalize the conscience of the Hindu society 
which had become moribund as well morbid. Ranade aimed to create a real 
social democracy, without which there could be no sure and stable politics. 
The conflict was between two opposing points of view and it centred round 
the question which is more important for the survival of a nation, political 
freedom or. strong moral fiber. Ranade took the view that moral stamina 
was more important than political freedom. This was also the view of Lecky 
the great historian who after a careful and comparative study of history 
came to the conclusion that :
“The foundation of a Nation’s strength and prosperity is laid in pure domestic 
life, in commercial integrity, in a high standard of moral worth, and of public 
spirit, in simple habits, in courage, uprightness, and a certain soundness and 
moderation of judgment which springs quite as much from character as from 
intellect. If you would form a wise judgment of the future of a nation, observe 
carefully whether these qualities are increasing or decaying. Observe carefully 
what qualities count for most in public life. Is character becoming of greater 
or less importance ? Are the men who obtain the highest posts in the nation 
men of whom, in private life, irrespective of party competent judges speak 
with genuine respect ? Are they of sincere convictions, consistent lives and 
indisputable integrity ? It is by observing this current that you can best cast 
the horoscope of a nation.”
Ranade was not only wise but he was also logical. He told his opponents 
against playing the part of Political Radicals and Social Tories. In clear and 
unmistakable terms he warned them saying :
“You cannot be liberal by halves. You cannot be liberal in politics and 
conservative in religion. The heart and the head must go together. You cannot 
cultivate your intellect, enrich your mind, enlarge the sphere of your political 
rights and privileges, and at the same time keep your hearts closed and cramped. 
It is an idle dream to expect men to remain enchained and enshackled in their 
own superstition and social evils, while they are struggling hard to win rights 
and privileges from their rulers. Before long these vain dreamers will find 
their dreams lost.”
Experience has shown that these words of Ranade have been true, even 
prophetic. Let those who deny this consider : Where are we today in politics
