289
 
FEDERATION VERSUS FREEDOM
are allotted to British India and 125 to the Indian States. In the Council of 
State, out of the 260 seats, 156 are allotted to British India and 104 to the 
Indian States. It may be noticed that distribution between British India and 
the Indian States is not based upon an equalitarian principle. It is possible 
to take the population as the basis of representation. It is also possible to 
take the revenue as the basis of representation. But neither of these has 
been taken as the basis of distribution of seats. Whether you take population 
as the basis or whether you take revenue as the basis, you will find that 
British India has been under-represented, while the Indian States have been 
over-represented in the two Chambers. The method of filling the seats is also 
noteworthy. The representatives of the British India in both the Chambers 
will be elected. The representatives of the Indian States, on the other hand, 
are to be appointed i.e., nominated, by the Rulers of the States. It is open 
to a Ruler to provide that the representatives of his State, though appointed 
by him, may be chosen by his subjects but this is a matter which is left to 
his discretion. He may appoint a person who is chosen by his people or he 
may, if he pleases, do both, choose and appoint. In the final result a State’s 
representative is to be appointed by the Ruler as distinguished from being 
elected by the people. In the case of British India, the representatives are 
to be elected, but here again there is a peculiarity which may be noticed. 
In the case of all bi-cameral Legislatures the Lower House being a popular 
house is always elected directly by the people, while the Upper House being 
a revising Chamber is elected by indirect election. In the case of the Indian 
Federation this process is reversed. The Upper Chamber will be elected by 
direct election by the people and it is the Lower Chamber which is going to 
be elected indirectly by the Provincial Legislatures. The life of the Federal 
Assembly is fixed for a term of five years, although it may be dissolved 
sooner. The Council of State on the other hand is a permanent body not 
liable to dissolution. It is a body which lives by renewal of a third part of 
its membership every three years.
Now the authority of the two Chambers to pass laws and to sanction 
expenditure may be noted. With regard to the authority to pass laws some 
constitutions make a distinction between money bills and other bills and 
provide that with regard to money bills the Upper Chamber shall not have 
the power to initiate such a bill, and also that the Upper Chamber shall 
not have the authority to reject it. It is given the power only to suspend 
the passing of the bill for a stated period. The Indian constitution makes no 
such distinction at all. The money bills and other bills are treated on the 
same footing and require the assent of both the Chambers before they can 
become law. The only distinction is that while according to section 30(1) a 
bill which is not a money bill may originate in either Chamber, a money 
bill, according to section 37, shall not originate in the Upper Chamber. But 
according to section 3(2) a money bill needs the assent of the Upper Chamber 
as much as any other bill.
