472
 
DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES
that the existing holdings, small as they are, are too big for the available 
instruments of production other than land ? Facts such as these interpreted 
in the light of our theory force upon us the conclusion that the existing 
holdings are uneconomic, not, however, in the sense that they are too small 
but that they are too large. Shall we therefore argue that the existing 
holdings should be further reduced in size with a view to render them 
economic in the sense in which we have used the term ? Unwary readers 
might suppose that this is the only logical and inevitable conclusion— a 
conclusion that is in strange contrast with the main trend of opinion 
in this country. Contrary, no doubt, the conclusion is ; but it is by no 
means inevitable. For, from our premises we can with perfect logic and 
even with more cogency argue for increase in agricultural stock and 
implements which in turn will necessitate enlarged holdings which will 
be economic holdings as well.
Consequently the remedy for the ills of agriculture in India does not 
lie primarily in the matter of enlarging holdings but in the matter of 
increasing capital and capital goods. That capital arises from saving 
and that saving is possible where there is surplus is a commonplace of 
political economy.
Does our agriculture—the main stay of our population—give us any 
surplus ? We agree with the answer which is unanimously in the negative. 
We also approve of the remedies that are advocated for turning the deficit 
economy into a surplus economy, namely by enlarging and consolidating 
the holdings. What we demur to is the method of realizing this object. 
For we most strongly hold that the evil of small holdings in India is not 
fundamental but is derived from the parent evil of the mal-adjustment in 
her social economy. Consequently if we wish to effect a permanent cure 
we must go to the parent malady.
But before doing that we will show how we suffer by a bad social 
economy. It has become a tried statement that India is largely an 
agicultural country. But what is scarcely known is that notwithstanding 
the vastness of land under tillage, so little land is cultivated in proportion 
to her population.
Mulhall’s figures for the year 1895 clearly demonstrate the point. 
Acres per inhabitant in 1895
Great 
Britain
Ireland France Germany Russia Austria Italy
Spain 
and 
Portugal
U.S.A.
India
0.91
3.30
2.30
1.70
5.60
2.05
1.75
2.90
8.90
1.0
