410
 
DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES
of having to be a burden on public charity, the fear of having to be burned 
or buried at public cost are factors too strong to permit a man to stand 
out for his Fundamental Rights. The unemployed are thus compelled to 
relinquish their Fundamental Rights for the sake of securing the privilege 
to work and to subsist.
What about those who are employed? Constitutional Lawyers assume that 
the enactment of Fundamental Rights is enough to safeguard their liberty and 
that nothing more is called for. They argue that where the State refrains from 
intervention in private affairs—economic and social—the residue is liberty. 
What is necessary is to make the residue as large as possible and State 
intervention as small as possible. It is true that where the State refrains 
from intervention what remains is liberty. But this does not dispose of the 
matter. One more question remains to be answered. To whom and for whom 
is this liberty ? Obviously this liberty is liberty to the landlords to increase 
rents, for capitalists to increase hours of work and reduce rate of wages. This 
must be so. It cannot be otherwise. For in an economic system employing 
armies of workers, producing goods en masse at regular intervals some one 
must make rules so that workers will work and the wheels of industry run 
on. If the State does not do it the private employer will. Life otherwise will 
become impossible. In other words what is called liberty from the control 
of the State is another name for the dictatorship of the private employer.
How to prevent such a thing happening ? How to protect the unemployed 
as well as the employed from being cheated out of their Fundamental 
Rights to life, liberty and pursuit of happiness ? The useful remedy 
adopted by Democratic countries is to limit the power of Government to 
impose arbitrary restraints in political domain and to invoke the ordinary 
power of the Legislature to restrain the more powerful individual from 
imposing arbitrary restraints on the less powerful in the economic field. 
The inadequacy may the futility of the plan has been well-established. The 
successful invocation by the less powerful of the authority of the Legislature 
is a doubtful proposition. Having regard to the fact that even under adult 
suffrage all Legislatures and Governments are controlled by the more 
powerful an appeal to the Legislature to intervene is a very precarious 
safeguard against the invasion of the liberty of the less powerful. The plan 
follows quite a different method. It seeks to limit not only the power of 
Government to impose arbitrary restraints but also of the more powerful 
individuals or to be more precise to eliminate the possibility of the more 
powerful having the power to impose arbitrary restraints on the less powerful 
by withdrawing from the control he has over the economic life of people. 
There cannot be slightest doubt that of the two remedies against the invasion 
by the more powerful of the rights and liberties of the less powerful the 
one contained in the proposal is undoubtedly the more effective. Considered
