303
 
FEDERATION VERSUS FREEDOM
to enter the Federation. The Federation, therefore, while it affects British 
India and the Provinces uniformly and completely so far as the legislative 
authority of the Federation is concerned, it touches different States in 
different degrees. A Ruler may federate in respect of one subject yet he is 
as good a member of the Federation as a Ruler who accepts all the fifty-
nine items in the Federal List.
The Provincial List is a list which is subject to the exclusive Legislative 
authority of the Provinces. There is no corresponding State List given in the 
Act for the Federated States. It cannot be given. But it can be said that it 
includes all these subjects which are not surrendered by the State to the 
Federation. Now with regard to the exclusive authority of the Provincial 
Legislature, still in the event of emergency it is open to the Federal Legislature 
to make laws for a Province or any part thereof with respect to any of the 
matters enumerated in the Provincial List, it the Governor-General has 
in his discretion declared under section 102 by proclamation that a grave 
emergency exists whereby the security of India is threatened whether by 
way of war or by internal disturbances. There is no such provision in respect 
of the Indian States. A grave emergency which threatens India may quite 
well arise within a State as it may within the territories of a Province. It 
is thus clear that while the Federal Legislature can intervene and make 
laws for a Province when there is emergency, it cannot intervene and make 
laws for the Federated States under similar circumstances.
(b) In the matter of the Executive
Again in the matter of the Executive, the States and the Provinces do 
not stand on the same footing. Section 8 defines the scope of the executive 
authority of the Federation which according to section 7 is exercisable by 
the Governor-General on behalf of His Majesty. According to sub-section (1) 
to sub-clause (a) the authority of the Federal Executive extends to matters 
with respect to which the Federal Legislature has power to make laws, 
but this clause has not the same application with respect to the States as 
it has with respect to the provinces. With regard to the provinces it has 
authority in all matters which are included in the Federal Legislative List. 
It has also exclusive authority with respect to certain matters included in 
the Concurrent List subject to certain limitations ; but with regard to the 
States the case is very different. With regard to the States the Federation 
can have no executive authority in respect of subjects in the Concurrent 
List, but also the Federation is not entitled to have exclusive authority with 
respect to matters included in the Federal Legislative List. Sub-clause 2 of 
section 8 is very important. It says :
“The executive authority of the Ruler of a Federated State shall, 
notwithstanding anything in this section, continue to be exercisable in that 
State with respect to matters with respect to which the Federal Legislature
