STATES AND MINORITIES
395
ARTICLE II—Section II
REMEDIES AGAINST INVASION OF FUNDAMENTAL RIGHTS
The United States of India shall provide :
Clause 1
(1) That the Judicial Power of India shall be vested in a Supreme Court.
(2) The Supreme Court shall have the power of 
superintendence over all other Courts or officers 
exercising the powers of a Court, whether or not 
such Courts or officers are subject to its appellate or 
revisional jurisdiction.
(3) The Supreme Court shall have the power on the application of an 
aggrieved party to issue what are called prerogative writs such as Hebeas 
Corpus, Quo Warranto Prohibition, Certiorari and Mandamus, etc. For 
purposes of such writs the Supreme Court shall be a Court of general 
jurisdiction throughout India.
(4) The right to apply for a writ shall not be abridged or suspended unless 
when in cases of rebellion or invasion the public safety may require it.
Clause 2
That the Authority of the Legislature and the Executive of the Union 
as well as of every State throughout India shall be 
subject to the following limitations :
It shall not be competent for any Legislature or Executive in India to 
pass a law or issue an order, rule or regulation so as to violate the following 
rights of the subjects of the State :
(1) to make and enforce contracts, to sue, be parties, and give evidence, 
to inherit, purchase, lease, sell, hold and convey real and personal property.
(2) to be eligible for entry into the civil and military employ and to all 
educational institutions except for such conditions and limitations as may be 
necessary to provide for the due and adequate representation of all classes 
of the subjects of the State.
(3) to be entitled to the full and equal enjoyment of the accommodations, 
advantages, facilities, educational institutions, privileges of inns, rivers, 
streams, wells, tanks, roads, paths, streets, public conveyances on land, air 
and water, theatres and other places of public resort or amusement except 
for such conditions and limitations applicable alike to all subjects of every 
race, class, caste, colour or creed.
(4) to be deemed fit for and capable of sharing without distinction the 
benefits of any religious or charitable trust dedicated to or created, maintained 
or licensed for the general public or for persons of the same faith and religion.
Judicial Protection 
against Executive 
Tyranny.
(For explanation, see 
page 406)
Protection against 
Unequal Treatment.
(For explanation, see 
pages 406-8)
