398
 
DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES
ARTICLE II—Section III
PROVISIONS FOR THE PROTECTION OF MINORITIES
The Constitution of the United States of India shall provide :
Clause 1
(1) That the Executive—Union or State—shall be non-Parliamentary in 
the sense that it shall not be removable before the 
term of the Legislature.
(2) Members of the Executive if they are not members of the Legislature 
shall have the right to sit in the Legislature, speak, vote and answer questions.
(3) The Prime Minister shall be elected by the whole House by single 
transferable vote.
(4) The representatives of the different minorities in the Cabinet shall 
be elected by members of each minority community in the Legislature by 
single transferable vote.
(5) The representatives of the majority community in the Executive shall 
be elected by the whole House by single transferable vote.
(6) A member of the Cabinet may resign his post on a censure motion or 
otherwise but shall not be liable to be removed except on impeachment by 
the House on the ground of corruption or treason.
Clause 2
(1) That there shall be appointed an Officer to be called the Superintendent 
of Minority Affairs.
(2) His status shall be similar to that of the 
Auditor-General appointed under section 166 of the 
Government of India Act of 1935 and removable in 
like manner and on the like grounds as a Judge of the Supreme Court,
(3) It shall be the duty of the Superintendent to prepare an annual report 
on the treatment of minorities by the public, as well as by the Governments, 
Union and State and of any transgressions of safeguards or any miscarriage 
of justice due to communal bias by Governments or their Officers.
(4) The Annual Report of the Superintendent shall be placed on the 
Table of the Legislatures—Union and State, and the Governments—Union 
and State, shall be bound to provide time for the discussion of the Report.
Clause 3
That Social Boycott, Promoting or Instigating a Social Boycott or 
Threatening a Social Boycott as defined below shall be 
declared to be an offence :
Protection against 
Communal Executive.
(For explanation, see 
pages 412-15)
Protection against 
social and official 
tyranny.
(For explanation, see 
page 416)
Protection against 
social boycott.
(For explanation, 
see pages 416-18)
