340
 
DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES
with a revenue of Rs. 80 and a population of 27. Each one of these is an 
Autonomous State, even the one with a revenue of Rs. 80 and a population 
of 27 !
The Autonomy of these States means that each one must take upon itself 
the responsibility to supply to its subjects all the services which relate to 
matters falling under law and order such as revenue, executive and judicial 
and all the services which affect public welfare such as education, sanitation, 
roads etc. We in Bombay with our 12 crores of revenue are finding it difficult 
to maintain a civilized standard of administration. Other Provinces with 
equally large revenue are finding the same difficulty. How then can these 
small tiny states with a revenue of few hundreds and a population of few 
thousands cater to any of the wants which a civilized man must have his 
Government satisfy in full measure ? With the best of motives and given 
an ideal Prince the task is hopeless.
The only way out is to reorganize the whole area occupied by the Indian 
States. The proper solution would be to fix an area of a certain size and of 
certain revenue and to constitute it into a New Province and to pension off 
the rulers now holding any territory in that area. Only such States should 
be retained in whose case by measure of area and revenue it can be said 
that they by reason of their resources are in a position to provide a decent 
standard of administration. Those which cannot satisfy the test must go. 
There is no other way. This is not merely what might be done. I say, to do 
this is our duty and a sacred duty.
I know some will think of the hereditary right of the Prince to rule over 
his territory. But I ask, what is more important, the right of the Prince 
or the welfare of the people ? I am sure that even the best friends of the 
States will not say that the rights of the Prince are more important than 
the welfare of the people. Which should give way, if the two are in conflict ? 
There again, I am sure that even the best friends of the States will not say 
that the welfare of the people should be sacrificed for the sake of maintaining 
the rights of the Prince.
The question of the reorganization of the Indian States is not a political 
question. As I look at it, is a purely administrative question. It is also an 
inevitable question. Because, not to tackle it is to condemn the people of 
the States—and there are millions of them—perpetually to a life of misery 
and security. The way I suggest is not a revolutionary way. To pension off 
a Prince and to annex his territory is a legal way and can fall under the 
principles with which we are familiar under the Land Acquisition Act which 
allows private rights and properties to be acquired for public purposes.
Unfortunately, the question of the Indian States has not been tackled 
from this point of view so far. The question that I want to place before
