229
 
RANADE, GANDHI AND JINNAH
What was the political philosophy of Ranade ? It may be summed up in 
three propositions :
 (1) We must not set up as our ideal something which is purely imaginary. 
An ideal must be such that it must carry the assurance that it is a 
practicable one.
 (2) In politics, sentiment and temperament of the people are more 
important than intellect and theory. This is particularly so in the 
matter of framing a Constitution. A constitution is as much a matter 
of taste as clothes are. Both must fit, both must please.
 (3) In political negotiations the rule must be what is possible. That does 
not mean that we should be content with what is offered. No. It 
means that you must not refuse what is offered when you know that 
your sanctions are inadequate to compel your opponent to concede 
more.
These are the three main doctrines of Ranade’s political philosophy. 
It would be quite easy to illustrate them by appropriate quotations from 
his writings and his speeches. There is no time for that nor is there any 
necessity, for they must be clear to every student of Ranade’s speeches and 
writings. Who could quarrel with Ranade on these three propositions and 
if there be one, on which ? On the first only a visionary will quarrel. We 
need not take any notice of him. The second proposition is so evident that 
we could only ignore it at our peril. The third proposition is something on 
which a difference of opinion is possible. Indeed it is this which divided the 
Liberals from the Congressmen. I am not a liberal, but I am sure the view 
Ranade held was the right one. There can be no compromise on principle, 
and there should not be. But once the principle is agreed upon, there can be 
no objection to realize it by instalments. Graduation in politics is inevitable, 
and when the principle is accepted it is not harmful and indeed it may in 
certain circumstances be quite advantageous. On this third proposition there 
was really no difference between him and Tilak, except this : Tilak would 
have the possible maximised by the application of sanctions ; Ranade would 
look askance at sanctions. This is all. On the rest they were agreed. The 
absence of sanctions in Ranade’s political philosophy need not detract much 
from its worth. We all know what sanctions are available to us. We have 
tried all, old as well as new, with what effect I need not stop to describe.
IX
In celebrating the birthday of Ranade we must not overlook what the 
critics and opponents are likely to say. The critics will ask what is the point 
in celebrating the birthday of Ranade. That the days of hero-worship are 
gone long past will be the line of their argument. The oppenents will say if 
I condemn idolatry when it pertains to Mr. Gandhi and to Mr. Jinnah how 
do I join in idolizing Mr. Ranade ? These are very pertinent questions. True
