406
 
DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES
Clause 4 provides that once a State is admitted into the Union, its 
integrity shall be maintained and it shall not be liable to sub-division except 
in accordance with the provisions contained in the clause.
ARTICLE I—Section II
Clauses 1 and 2
Clause 1 permits the United States of India to incorporate States which are 
independent but which are on the border and which desire to join the Union.
Clause 2 enables the United States of India to acquire territory and to 
incorporate it or to treat it as separate territory.
ARTICLE II—Section I
The inclusion of Fundamental Rights in the Constitution requires no 
justification. The necessity of Fundamental Rights is recognized in all 
Constitutions old and new. The Fundamental Rights included in the Article are 
borrowed from the Constitutions of various countries particularly from those 
wherein the conditions are more or less analogous to those existing in India.
ARTICLE II—Section II
Clause 1
Rights are real only if they are accompanied by remedies. It is no use 
giving rights if the aggrieved person has no legal remedy to which he can 
resort when his rights are invaded. Consequently when the Constitution 
guarantees rights it also becomes necessary to make provision to prevent the 
Legislature and the Executive from overriding them. This function has been 
usually assigned to the judiciary and the Courts have been made the special 
guardians of the rights guaranteed by the Constitution. The clause does no 
more than this. The clause proposes to give protection to the citizen against 
Executive tyranny by investing the Judiciary with certain powers of inquisition 
against the abuse of authority by the Executive. This power takes the form 
of issue of writs. The High Courts in India possess these powers under the 
Government of India and under their letters patent. These powers are however 
subject to two limitations. In the first place the powers given by the Letters 
Patent are available only to the High Courts in the Presidency Towns and 
not to all. Secondly these powers are subject to laws made by the Indian 
Legislature. Thirdly the powers given by the Government of India Act, 1935 
are restricted and may prove insufficient for the protection of the aggrieved 
person. The clause achieves two objectives : (1) to give the fullest power to 
the Judiciary to issue what under the English Law are called Prerogative 
Writs and (2) to prevent the Legislature from curtailing these powers in any 
manner whatsoever.
Clause 2
It is difficult to expect that in a country like India where most persons 
are communally minded those in authority will give equal treatment to those
