STATES AND MINORITIES
401
ARTICLE II—Section IV
SAFEGUARDS FOR THE SCHEDULED CASTES
PART I—GUARANTEES
The Constitution of the United States of India shall guarantee to the Scheduled 
Castes the following Rights:
Clause 1
Right to Representation in the Legislature
(1) Quantum of Representation.—(a) (i) The Scheduled Castes shall have 
minimum representation in the Legislature—Union and State—and if there be 
a group Constitution then in the group Legislature equal to the ratio of their 
population to the total population. Provided that no other minority is allowed to 
claim more representation than what is due to it on the basis of its population.
(ii) The Scheduled Castes of Sind and N.W.F. Provinces shall be given their 
due share of representation.
(iii) Weightage where it becomes necessary to reduce a huge communal 
majority to reasonable dimensions shall come out of the share of the majority. 
In no case shall it be at the cost of another minority community.
(iv) Weightage carved out from the share of majority shall not be assigned 
to one community only. But the same shall be divided among all minority 
communities equally or in inverse proportion to their—
 (1) economic position,
 (2) social status, and
 (3) educational advance.
(b) There should be no representation to special interests. But if the same 
is allowed it must be taken out of the share of representation given to that 
community to which the special interest belongs.
(2) Method of Election—
(A) For Legislative Bodies
 (a) The system of election introduced by the Poona Pact shall be abolished.
 (b) In its place, the system of Separate Electorates shall be substituted.
 (c) Franchise shall be adult franchise.
 (d) The system of voting shall be cumulative.
(B) For Local Bodies
The principles for determining the quantum of representation and the Method 
of election for Municipalities and Local Boards shall be the same as that adopted 
for the Union and State Legislatures.
Right to 
Representation in 
the Legislature.
(For explanation, 
see pages 419-24)
