310
 
DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES
 
 goods manufactured or produced in one locality and similar goods 
manufactured or produced in another locality.
(2) Any law passed in contravention of this shall, to the extent of the 
contravention, be invalid.”
Now it will be clear from the terms of this section that the freedom of 
trade and commerce is confined only to the provinces. That means the Indian 
States are free to prohibit the entry of goods from the Provinces absolutely 
or subject them to duty. This is quite contrary to the fundamental idea 
underlying a federal union. To allow one unit of the Federation to carry on 
commercial warfare against another unit is nothing but negation of federation.
(4) Relationship of the People under the Federation
Before I enter into this question it is necessary to clear the ground by 
pointing out certain distinctions. The words ‘State’ and ‘Society’ are often 
presented as though there was a contrast between the two. But there is no 
distinction of a fundamental character between a State and a society. It is 
true that the plenary powers of the State operate through the sanction of law 
while society depends upon religious and social sanctions for the enforcement 
of its plenary powers. The fact, however, remains that both have plenary 
powers to coerce. As such, there is no contrast between state and society. 
Secondly, the persons composing society are persons who are also members 
of the State. Here again, there is no difference between State and Society.
There is, however, one difference, but it is of another kind. Every person, 
who is a member of society and dwells in it, is not necessarily a member 
of the State. Only those who dwell within the boundary of the State do 
not necessarily belong to the State. This distinction between those, who 
belong to the State and those who do not, is very crucial and should not be 
forgotten because it has important consequences. Those who belong to State 
are members and have the benefits of membership which consists of the 
totality rights and duties which they possess over against the State. From 
the side of duty the relation is best indicated by the word subject, from 
the side of rights it is best designated by the word citizen. This difference 
involves the consequence that those who dwell in the State without belonging 
to it have no benefit of membership which means that they are foreigners 
and not citizens.
Theoretically, the task of differentiating the foreigners from the citizens 
of a State would seem to be an easy task, in fact, almost a mechanical task. 
This is particularly true of an Unitary State. Here there is a simple question : 
What is the relation of this State as against any and all foreign States ? In 
a Federal State the matter is complicated by the fact that every individual 
stands in a dual relationship. On the one hand, he sustains certain relations 
to the Federal State as a whole ; and on the other he sustains certain 
relations to the State in which he may reside. The moment an attempt is
