150
 
DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES
representation for all areas will not work. In such a federation the Prime 
Minister and President of India will always be from the Hindi speaking 
area. You should have two Federations, one Federation of the North and 
one Federation of the South and a Confederation of the North and the 
South with three subjects for the Confederation to legislate upon and equal 
representation for both the federations.”
These are the real thoughts of Mr. Rajagopalachari. They came to me as 
a revelation coming as they did from the innermost heart of a Congressman. 
I now regard Mr. Rajagopalachari as a prophet predicting the break-up 
of India into the North and the South. We must do everything to falsify 
Mr. Rajagopalachari’s prophecy.
It must not be forgotten that there was a civil war in the U.S.A. between 
the North and the South. There may also be a civil war between the North 
and the South in India. Time will supply many grounds for such a conflict. 
It must not be forgotten that there is a vast cultural difference between the 
North and the South and cultural differences are very combustible.
In creating this consolidation of the North and balkanization of the South 
the Commission did not realize that they were dealing with a political and 
not a merely linguistic problem.
It would be most unstatesmanlike not to take steps right now to prevent 
such a thing happening. What is the remedy ?
PART III
SOLUTION
CHAPTER 6
THE DIVISION OF THE NORTH
The problem having been realized we must now search for a solution.
The solution lies obviously in adopting some standard for determining 
the size of a State. It is not easy to fix such a standard. If two crores of 
population be adopted as a standard measure most of the Southern States 
will become mixed States. The enlargement of the Southern States to meet 
the menace of the Northern States is therefore impossible. The only remedy 
is to break up the Nothern States of U.P., Bihar and Madhya Pradesh.
How did this solution not strike the Congress Working Committee I am 
unable to understand. It is so obvious.
Division of the Northern States
As I have said the Commission in designing linguistic States has created 
a consolidation of the North and balkanization of the South. The Commission 
has not I am sure done this intentionally. But intentionally or unintentionally 
the fact is there. Its evil consequences are also clear.
