347
 
FEDERATION VERSUS FREEDOM
will be bondmen of the Political Department. The sources of mandate of those 
two sets of representatives in the Federal Legislature will be different. The 
British India representatives will be engaged in extending the authority of 
the Ministers. The States representatives are sure to act and will be made 
to act so as to lend support to the authority of the Governor-General as 
against the Ministers. This conflict is inevitable and it is sure to embitter 
the feelings of British India towards the Indian States. This was precisely 
what happened in the last regime in the Provinces. The feelings of the elected 
members towards the nominated members in the old Provincial Councils 
were certainly unfriendly. This experience I am sure will be repeated in the 
Federal Legislature. That it should be so is very natural when one section 
of the House feels that the other section has been brought in to thwart 
its wishes and is acting as the tool of some power outside the control of 
the Legislature. This is one element of disharmony. The other element of 
disharmony is the disparity in the position of British Indian States under 
the Federation. Equality before law is a precious thing. But not all people 
value it for the same reason. Most cherish it an ideal. Few realize why it is 
crucial. Equality before the law compels men to make common cause with 
all others similarly affected. Whereas if there is no equality, if some are 
favoured and others are burdened, those specially favoured not only refuse 
to join those who are burdened in the struggle for equality but actually 
take sides against them. A Dictator might, as the kings did in the olden 
times, pull out one by one the teeth of a few without necessarily exciting 
the resentment of the other people. On the contrary, the others will join in 
the raid. But suppose a law was made that all must contribute as much 
money as the dictators ask for under penalty of their teeth being drawn out 
all would rise in opposition. There is no equality between British India and 
the Indian States under the Federation. Indian States enjoy many benefits 
and many exemptions which are denied to British India. This is particularly 
so in the matter of taxation. There is bound to be great acrimony between 
the representatives of British India and those of the Indian States as to 
who should bear the load of taxation first. Patriotism vanishes when you 
touch a man’s pocket and I am sure that the States representatives will 
prefer their own financial interest to the necessities of a common front to 
make the executive responsible to the Legislature.
What is the use of housing British India and the Indian States under one 
edifice if the result is to make them quarrel with each other ?
There is a complete dissimilarity between the forms of Government 
prevalent in British India and the Indian States and the principles underlying 
the two. These dissimilarities need not produce any antagonism between the 
Indian States and British India if the two continue to evolve in their separate 
spheres. So long as the form of Government in the Indian States does not 
become a factor in the decision of affairs which affects British India, British
