460
 
DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES
the village lands, apply, Government, should undertake compulsorily to 
restrip the scattered fields of the village. This compulsory restripping 
is to be executed on two principles, (1) of “Economic Unit” and (2) of 
“Original Ownership”. Regarding the merits of these two principles the 
Baroda Committee observes.6
“In the first the value of each holding is ascertained, then the 
original boundaries are removed, roads are marked out, lands required 
for public purposes are set apart, and the rest of the land is parcelled 
out into new plots. Each of these new plots must be of such a size 
as, having regard to the local conditions of soil, tillage etc. to form an 
economic field, i.e., a parcel of land necessary to keep fully engaged 
and support one family. These new plots may be sold by auction among 
the old occupants, restriction being placed on purchase so as to prevent 
a large number of cultivators from being ousted. The purchase, money 
may then be divided in a certain proportion among the original owners 
of pieces, a portion being reserved for expenses, in which Government 
would also contribute a share. Another mode would be to acquire all 
the land of the village then to sell it in newly constituted plots by 
auction as is done by City Improvement Trusts or by Government 
when laying out new roads in Cities or when extending a town. But 
we do not recommend its adoption in the improvement of agricultural 
land. It may result in land speculation and the small holders may be 
ousted in such numbers as to cause a real hardship.’’
“According to the second method when the restripping has been 
decided, a list of Khatedars and their holdings is made and the 
latter are valued at their market price by Panchas. Then the land is 
redistributed and each Khatedar is given new land in proportion to his 
original holding and as far as possible of the same value, difference to 
be adjusted by cash payment. In this method no Khatedar is deprived 
of his land. Each is accommodated and in the place of his original 
small and scattered fields gets one plot of almost their aggregate size. 
It is only a few people whose holding may be very small and whom it 
would not be expedient to keep on as farmers, that may have to lose 
their small pieces. But they too would benefit as they would get their 
full value in money.”
The Baroda Committee prefers the second method because: 
“It takes as its starting principle, that nobody (except perhaps a few, 
holding plots of insignificant sizes) is going to be driven off the land. It 
will give even the smallest man, chance to better his condition.  Each 
land holder receives a new compact piece of land proportionate to the
6. R. B. C, p. 35
