 
THOUGHTS ON LINGUISTIC STATES
157
The Gujarathi population is filled with fear that Maharashtrians 
will practise discrimination against them. But under our Constitution 
discrimination is not possible for the reason that the Constitution contains 
a list of fundamental rights and remedies by way of writs from the High 
Court and the Supreme Court which can immediately provide redress for 
a wrong. For every wrong of a discriminative character there is a remedy 
provided by the Constitution. Why should the Gujarathis have any fear ?
Let us now consider what benefit the Gujarathis are going to get from 
Bombay being made a separate City State. Their population in the Bombay 
State is only ten per cent. How many seats can they get in the Bombay City 
State Legislature ? Not even ten per cent. How can ten per cent protect 
their clients against 90 per cent ?
It must be remembered that the feelings between the Maharashtrians 
and the Gujarathis would hereafter be running high as never before. A 
Maharashtrian will not vote for a Gujarathi candidate and a Gujarathi 
voter will not vote for a Maharashtrian candidate. Hitherto the Gujarathis 
have been able to plough the sands of Maharashtra with their money. But 
money may not succeed once self-respect is aroused. The Gujarathis must 
consider whether goodwill is not a better protection than a paltry share in 
the Government of the City.
While the case of Maharashtra is as strong as steel there are some points 
on the other side which they must not fail to consider in their anger.
They want Bombay to be within Maharashtra. But the question which 
they must consider is : What do they want ? Do they want prosperous 
Bombay or do they want decadent Bombay ? Can Bombay be prosperous 
under Maharashtra ? This in other words means : can Maharashtra 
provide the capital necessary for the growing trade and industry of the 
City ? No Maharashtrian can answer this question in the affirmative. The 
Maharashtrians may be able to supply the need for capital after a course 
of years. But certainly not now.
The second point is : what would be the effect on the standard of living 
of Maharashtrians living in Bombay if the City’s prosperity declines either 
by flight of capital or removal of business houses. The Maharashtrians must 
not forget, however it may hurt their pride, that they are a nation of clerks 
and coolies. What employment can they get in a declining city ?
The Maharashtrian should consider the question of Bombay from this 
point of view. There is a saying which says :
loZuk'ks leqRiÂs v/Z R;tfr iafMr% A
There is also another reason why Bombay City should be made a separate 
state. The minorities and the Scheduled Castes who are living in the villages 
are constantly subjected to tyranny, oppression, and even murders by the 
members of the majority communities. The minorities need an asylum,
