 
THOUGHTS ON LINGUISTIC STATES
169
a complete change. It taught the people to regard their wishes and wants as 
the supreme criterion of their right to do what they like to do with themselves. 
It proclaimed the idea of the sovereignty of the people uncontrolled by the past 
and uncontrolled by the existing state.”
The caste is a nation but the rule of one caste over another may not be 
admitted to be the same as the rule of one nation over another. But supposing 
the case is not carried so far but is limited to majority and minority even 
then the question remains : What right has the majority to rule the minority?
The answer is that whatever the majority does it is right. What complain 
the minorities can haye ?
People who rely upon majority rule forget the fact that majorities are of 
two sorts : (1) Communal majority and (2) Political majority.
A political majority is changeable in its class composition. A political 
majority grows. A communal majority is born. The admission to a political 
majority is open. The door to a communal majority is closed. The politics 
of a political majority are free to all to make and unmake. The politics of a 
communal majority are made by its own members born in it.
How can a communal majority run away with the title deeds given to a 
political majority to rule ? To give such title deeds to a communal majority is 
to establish a hereditary Government and make the way open to the tyranny 
of that majority. This tyranny of the communal majority is not an idle dream. 
It is an experience of many minorities. This experience to Maharashtrian 
Brahmins being every recent it is unnecessary to dilate upon it.
What is the remedy ? No doubt some safeguards against this communal 
tyranny are essential. The question is : What can they be ? The first 
safeguard is not to have too large a State. The consequences of too large 
a State on the minority living within it are not understood by many. The 
larger the State the smaller the proportion of the minority to the majority. 
To give one illustration—If Mahavidarbha remained separate, the proportion 
of Hindus to Muslims would be four to one. In the United Maharashtra 
the proportion will be fourteen to one. The same would be the case of the 
Untouchables. A small stone of a consolidated majority placed on the chest 
of the minority may be borne. But the weight of a huge mountain it cannot 
bear. It will crush the minorities. Therefore creation of smaller States is a 
safeguard to the minorities.
The second safeguard is some provision for representation in the 
Legislature. The old type of remedy provided in the Constitution were 
(1) certain number of reserved seats and (2) separate electorates. Both these 
safeguards have been given up in the new Constitution. The lambs are shorn 
of the wool. They are feeling the intensity of the cold. Some tempering of 
the wool is necessary.
