156
 
DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES
Bombay is a home only to the Maharashtrians and none else. It is not 
therefore logical or fair to count the non-Maharashtrians for the purpose of 
coming to the conclusion as to who form the majority of population in the 
Bombay City.
Again it is not realized that the increase in the non-Marathi-speaking 
people in the Bombay City is due to the absence of a local law restricting 
citizenship. If Bombay State had such a law all this influx into Bombay 
from all parts of India could have been shut out and the Maharashtrian 
majority retained.
It is also not realized that the influx of the non-Maharashtrians in Bombay 
is due to the fact that Bombay is a port, and it is a port on the Western 
Coast. The route from Europe to Bombay is much shorter than the route 
from Europe to Calcutta or Europe to Madras. That is why large number of 
poor people from other parts of India leave their homes and come to Bombay 
as temporary residents. It is easier to find a job in Bombay than elsewhere.
Really speaking the matter has to be looked at from a different point of 
view. People have been coming to Bombay for the last two hundred years or 
so. Yet this influx has not reduced the Maharashtrian population in the city 
below 48 per cent. After two hundred years, the bedrock of its population 
remains Maharashtrian in its composition. This is due to the migratory 
character of City (See Appendix 3). The Gujarathis are migratory population.
There are also other arguments which could be urged in favour of allowing 
Bombay to remain as part of Maharashtra.
Bombay is not the only composite city in India. Calcutta and Madras are 
also composite cities. If Calcutta can be part of Western Bengal and Madras 
can be part of Madras State what objection can there be to Bombay being 
made part of Maharashtra ? This is the question that every Maharashtrian 
will ask. I see no answer to this question. The only answer that comes to 
one’s mind is that the Congress High Command thinks that Maharashtrians 
are unfit to rule others. This is a slur on the Maharashtrian character and 
they will not tolerate it.
It is said that Bombay has been built up by the capital belonging to 
non-Maharashtrians. That may be so. But has Madras been built by the 
capital of Madrasees ? Has Calcutta been built by the capital of Bengalees? 
Without the capital of Europeans Madras and Calcutta would have been 
villages. Then why urge this point against the Maharashtrians when they 
claim Bombay to themselves ? Maharashtrians have at least contributed 
labour without which Bombay could not have been what it is. It must 
always be remembered that the life lines of Bombay lie in Maharashtra. The 
sources of its electricity lie in Maharashtra. Sources of its water supply lie 
in Maharashtra. The sources of its labour lie in Maharashtra. Maharashtra 
can at any time make the city of Bombay ‘Mohenjodaro’ a City of the Dead.
