392
 
DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES
ARTICLE II—Section I
FUNDAMENTAL RIGHTS OF CITIZENS
The Constitution of the United States of India shall recognize the 
following as Fundamental Rights of citizenship :
1. All persons born or naturalized within its territories are citizens of 
the United States of India and of the State wherein 
they reside. Any privilege or disability arising out 
of rank, birth, person, family, religion or religious 
usage and custom is abolished.
2. No State shall make or enforce any law or custom which shall abridge 
the privileges or immunities of citizens ; nor shall any State deprive any 
person of life, liberty and property without due process of law; nor deny 
to any person within its jurisdiction equal protection of law.
3. All citizens are equal before the law and possess equal civic rights. 
Any existing enactment, regulation, order, custom or interpretation of law 
by which any penalty, disadvantage or disability is imposed upon or any 
discrimination is made against any citizen shall, as from the day on which 
this Constitution comes into operation, cease to have any effect.
4. Whoever denies to any person, except for reasons by law applicable 
to persons of all classes and regardless of their social status, the full 
enjoyment of any of the accommodations, advantages, facilities, privileges 
of inns, educational institutions, roads, paths, streets, tanks, wells and 
other watering places, public conveyances on land, air or water, theatres 
or other places of public amusement, resort or convenience, whether they 
are dedicated to or maintained or licensed for the use of the public, shall 
be guilty of an offence.
5. All citizens shall have equal access to all institutions, conveniences 
and amenities maintained by or for the public.
6. No citizen shall be disqualified to hold any public office or exercise 
any trade or calling by reason of his or her religion, caste, creed, sex or 
social status.
7. (i) Every citizen has the right to reside in any part of India. No 
law shall be made abridging the right of a citizen to reside except for 
consideration of public order and morality.
(ii) Every citizen has the right to settle in any part of India, subject to 
the production of a certificate of citizenship from the State of his origin. 
The permission to settle shall not be refused or withdrawn except on 
grounds specified in sub-clause (iv) of this clause.
Fundamental Rights.
(For explanation, see 
page 406)
