287
 
FEDERATION VERSUS FREEDOM
note of two things. First, the Indian Federation comprises two distinct areas : 
British India and Indian States. This will be clear if you refer to section 5. 
Second, the relationship of these two areas with the Crown is not the same. 
The area known as British India is vested in the Crown while the area 
comprised in an Indian State is not vested in the Crown but is vested in 
the Ruler. This is clear if you refer to sections 2 and 311. The territory of 
British India being vested in the Crown the sovereignty over it belongs to 
the Crown and the territory of an Indian State being vested in the Ruler of 
the State the sovereignty over the State belongs to the Ruler of the State.
You will now understand why I said that in the Indian Federation 
the Crown is the ultimate source for a part of its authority and for the 
remaining part the Crown is the ultimate source of authority of the Indian 
Federation in so far as British India is part of the Federation. The Indian 
Ruler is the ultimate source of authority in so far as his State is part of this 
Federation. When therefore section 7 says that the Executive Authority of 
the Federation shall be exercised by the Governor-General on behalf of the 
Crown it must be understood that Crown’s authority which is delegated by 
him to the Governor-General in the working out of the Indian Federation 
is partly its own and partly derived from the Rulers of the Indian States.
What is the process by which the Crown acquires the authority which 
belongs to the Ruler of an Indian State ? The process is known under the 
Indian Act as Accession. This Accession is effected by what is called an 
Instrument of Accession executed by the Ruler of a State. The provisions 
relating to the Instrument of Accession are contained in section 6(1). That 
section reads as follows :-
“6. A State shall be deemed to have acceded to the Federation if His Majesty 
has signified his acceptance of an Instrument of Accession executed by the Ruler 
for himself, his heirs and successors—
 (a) declares that he accedes to the Federation as established under this 
Act, with the intent that His Majesty the King, the Governor-General 
of India, the Federal Legislature, the Federal Court and any other 
Federal Authority established for the purposes of the Federation 
shall by virtue of his Instrument of Accession, but subject always 
to the terms thereof, and for the purposes only of the Federation, 
exercise in relation to his State such functions as may be vested in 
him by or under this Act; and
 (b) assumes the obligation of ensuring that due effect is given within 
his State to the provisions of this Act so far as they are applicable 
therein by virtue of his Instrument of Accession.”
It is this Instrument of Accession which confers authority upon the Crown 
in the first instance so far as an Indian State is part of the Federation and
