302
 
DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES
could not be a perpetual union. Indeed, the Indian States would not enter 
into matrimony with the Indian Provinces unless the terms of divorce were 
settled before-hand. And so they are. That is why the Indian Federation is 
a compact and not a union.
(2) Relationship of the Units to the Federal Government
That each separate unit should have approximately equal political rights 
is a general feature of federations. Equality of status among the different 
units is a necessity. To make them unequal in status is to give units the 
power to become dominant partners. The existence of dominant partners 
in a federation, as observed by Dicey is fraught with two dangers. Firstly, 
the dominant partners may exercise an authority almost inconsistent with 
federal equality. Secondly, it may create combinations inside the Federation 
of dominant units and subordinate units and vice versa. To prevent such 
an unhealthy state of affairs, all federations proceed upon the principle of 
equality of status. How far does this principle obtain in the Indian Federation?
(a) In the matter of Legislation
As you know for purposes of Legislation the field is divided into three 
parts and there are three lists prepared which are called the Federal List, 
the Concurrent List and the Provincial List.
The Federal List contains 59 items as subjects of legislation. The Concurrent 
List contains 36 items.
The first thing to note is that both these lists are binding upon the 
Provinces. They cannot pick and choose as to the matters in these two lists 
in respect of which they will subject themselves to the authority of the 
Federation. The Provinces have no liberty to contract out of these two lists. 
The position of a Federating State is quite different. A Federating State can 
wholly keep itself out of the Concurrent List. Under section 6(2) there is no 
objection to the Ruler of any Indian State to agree to federate in respect 
of matters included in the Concurrent List. But there is no obligation upon 
them to do so. Such an agreement is not a condition precedent to their 
admission into the Federation.
With regard to the Federal List, there is no doubt an obligation on 
the Ruler of a State to subject himself to the legislative authority of 
the Federation in respect of the Federal List, but his subjection to the 
Federation will be confined to matters specified by him in his Instrument 
of Accession. There are as I stated altogether 59 items in the Federal List. 
There is no obligation upon the Prince to accept all subjects in the Federal 
List as a condition precedent for his entry into Federation. He may accept 
some only or he may accept all. Again one Ruler may accept one item 
and another Ruler may accept another. There is no rule laid down in the 
constitution that some items must be accepted by every Ruler who chooses
