STATES AND MINORITIES
417
sometimes small causes suffice for the proclamation of a social boycott against 
the Depressed Classes. Frequently it follows on the exercise by the Depressed 
Classes of their right to use the common well, but cases have been by no 
mean rare where a stringent boycott has been proclaimed simply because 
a Depressed Class man has put on the sacred thread, has bought a piece 
of land, has put on good clothes or ornaments, or has carried a marriage 
procession with a bridegroom on the horse through the public street”.
This was said in 1928. Lest it should be regarded as a phase which has 
now ended I reproduce below a copy of a petition by the Untouchables 
of the village Kheri Jessore in the Punjab addressed to the Deputy 
Commissioner of the Rohtak District in February 1947 and a copy of 
which was sent to me. It reads as follows :
“From
The Scheduled Caste People (Chamars), 
Village Kheri Jessore, Tehsil and District Rohtak.
To
The Deputy Commissioner,
Rohtak District, Rohtak.
Sir,
We, the following Scheduled Caste (Chamars) of the Village Kheri Jessore, 
beg to invite your kind attention to the hard plight, we are put to, due to 
the undue pressure and merciless treatment by the Caste Hindu Jats of 
this village.
It was about four months back that the Jats of the village assembled 
in the Chopal and told us to work in the fields on a wage in kind of one 
bundle of crops, containing only about one seer of grains per day per man 
instead of food at both times and a load of crops, and annas 8 in addition 
which we used to get before above announcement was made. As it was 
too little and insufficient to meet both ends, we refused to go to work. At 
this they were enraged and declared a Social Boycott on us. They made a 
rule that our cattle would not be allowed to graze in the jungle unless we 
would agree to pay a tax not leviable under Government for the animals, 
which they call as “Poochhi” They even do not allow our cattle to drink 
water in the village pool and have prevented the sweepers from cleaning 
the streets where we live so that heaps of dust and dirt are lying there 
which may cause some disease if left unattended to. We are forced to lead 
a shameful life and they are always ready to beat us and to tear down our 
honour by behaving indecently towards our wives, sisters and daughters. 
We are experiencing a lot of trouble of the worst type. While going to the
