STATES AND MINORITIES
411
in the light of these observations the proposal is essentially a proposal for 
safeguarding the liberty of the individual. No Constitutional Lawyer can 
therefore object to it on the ground that it goes beyond the usual scope of 
Constitutional Law.
So far as the plan has been considered purely as a means of safeguarding 
individual liberty. But there is also another aspect of the plan which is worthy 
of note. It is an attempt to establish State Socialism without abrogating 
Parliamentary Democracy and without leaving its establishment to the will 
of a Parliamentary Democracy. Critics of State Socialism even its friends 
are bound to ask why make it a part of the Constitutional Law of the land? 
Why not leave it to the Legislature to bring it into being by the ordinary 
process of Law. The reason why it cannot be left to the ordinary Law is not 
difficult to understand. One essential condition for the success of a planned 
economy is that it must not be liable to suspension or abadonment. It must be 
permanent. The question is how this permanence can be secured. Obviously 
it cannot be secured under the form of Government called Parliamentary 
Democracy under the system of Parliamentary Democracy, the policy of the 
Legislature and of the Executive is the policy of the majority for the time 
being. Under the system of Parliamentary Democracy the majority in one 
election may be in favour of State Socialism in Industry and in Agriculture. 
At the next election the majority may be against it. The anti-State Socialism 
majority will use its Law-making power to undoing the work of the pro-State 
Socialism majority and the pro-State Socialism majority will use its Law-
making power to doing over again what has been undone by their opponents. 
Those who want the economic structure of society to be modelled on State 
Socialism must realize that they cannot leave the fulfilment of so fundamental 
a purpose to the exigencies of ordinary Law which simple majorities—whose 
political fortunes are never determined by rational causes—have a right 
to make and unmake. For these reasons Political Democracy seems to be 
unsuited for the purpose.
What is the alternative ? The alternative is Dictatorship. There is no 
doubt that Dictatorship can give the permanence which State Socialism 
requires as an essential condition for its fructification. There is however 
one fact against Dictatorship which must be faced. Those who believe 
in individual freedom strongly object to Dictatorship and insists upon 
Parliamentary Democracy as a proper form of Government for a Free 
Society. For they feel that freedom of the individual is possible only under 
Parliamentary Democracy and not under Dictatorship. Consequently those 
who want freedom are not prepared to give up Parliamentary Democracy as 
a form of Government. However, much they may be anxious to have State 
Socialism they will not be ready to exchange Parliamentary Democracy for 
Dictatorship eventhough the gain by such an exchange is the achievement 
of State Socialism. The problem therefore is to have State Socialism
