492
 
DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES
up a right of appropriation to anything that is produced by common efforts 
nor to anything that is of joint use. Of the former one may cite the game 
of a communal hunt of the primitive folks. For an example of the latter 
the situation in a family presents a happy illustration, No member, it can 
be said without fear of being challenged, will ever set up a right of private 
appropriation to the articles of the Table or to the articles of decoration just 
as nobody will ever set up a right of exclusive ownership regarding public 
monuments. They are of the house. But every one of the family will surely 
set up a right to the exclusive use of his or her clothes. They are of the 
Individual. It is therefore, just a question of production and use and not of 
impulse that a thing is appropriated. Thus the creative and the possessive 
are on different levels and the methods of augmenting the former as of 
diminishing the latter are bound to be different. The more of one will not 
ensure the less of the latter.
With this we must close the review of Mr. Russell’s book. There is much in 
it that can be laid at the foundation of the future reconstruction of Society. 
Mr. Russell deserves full credit for having emphasized the psychic basis of 
social life. Social reconstruction depends upon the right understanding of 
the relation of individual to society—a problem which has eluded the grasp 
of many sociologists. Mr. Russell’s conception of the relation—as being of 
impulse to institution is, beyond doubt the truest. However, to understand 
this and many other problems the book touches I will strongly recommend 
the reader to go to the original. I have confined myself to putting Mr. 
Russell in his right place where I thought he was likely to be misunderstood 
and to guarding his uncritical readers against certain misconceptions that 
may pass off unnoticed. In both cases I have attempted to do my duty to 
Mr. Russell and to his readers.
zzz
