327
 
FEDERATION VERSUS FREEDOM
 (d) affects the procedure for criminal proceedings in which European 
British subjects are concerned ;
and unless the Governor of Province in his discretion thinks fit to give his 
previous sanction, there shall not be introduced or moved any Bill or amendment 
which—
 (i) repeals, amends or is repugnant to any Governor’s Act, or any 
ordinance promulgated in his discretion by the Governor; or
 (ii) repeals, amends or affects any Act relating to any police force.
(3) Nothing in this section affects the operation of any other provision in 
this Act which requires the previous sanction of the Governor-General or of 
a Governor to the introduction of any Bill or the moving of any amendment.”
The Federal Scheme does not stop with merely curtailing the power of 
the Federal Legislature as a means of maintaining the supremacy of the 
Executive. Under it the composition of the Federal Legislature is so arranged 
that the Legislature will always be at the beck and call of the Executive. In 
this connection it is necessary to bear in mind what the actual composition 
of the Federal Legislature is. As has already been pointed out there are 375 
members in the Legislative Assembly and of them 125 have been assigned 
to the Indian States and 250 to British India. In the Council of State the 
total is 260 and of them 104 are assigned to the States and 156 are alloted 
to British India. The seals assigned to the States are to be filled by the 
Princes by nomination. The scats assigned to British India are to be filled 
by election. The Federal Legislature is therefore an heterogeneous legislature 
partly elected and partly nominated.
The first question to be considered is how the Princes’ nominees in the 
Federal Legislature will behave. Will they be independent of the Federal 
Executive or will they be subservient to it ? It is difficult to prophesy. But 
certain influences which are likely to play a part in the making of these 
nominations may be noted- It is an indisputable fact that the British 
Government claims what are called rights of paramountcy over the States 
“Paramountcy” is an omnibus term to denote the rights which the Crown 
can exercise through the Political Department of the Government of India 
over the States. Among these rights is the right claimed by the Political 
Department to advise the Indian Princes in the matter of making certain 
appointments. It is well known that what is called “advice” is a diplomatic 
term for dictation. There is no doubt that the Political Department will 
claim the right to advise the Princes in the matter of filling up these places. 
Should this happen, what would be the result ? The result would be this that 
the Princes’ representatives would be simply another name for an official 
block owing allegiance, not to the people and not even to the Princes, but to 
the Political Department of the Government of India. Two things must be 
further noted. First is that Paramountcy is outside the Federal Government.
