MR. RUSSELL AND THE RECONSTRUCTION OF SOCIETY
487
materialism of the West leading to war and devastation. There is 
however no justification for setting the West in such a cruel contrast. 
The East is too prone to forget that materialist we all are ; even the 
East in spite of itself. Regarding the war, perhaps, the West may 
be blamed. But it can retort and say, “not to act is to be dead. Life 
consists in activity: It is better to act even violently as in war than 
not at all for only when we act that we may hope to act well.” Thus, 
surprising as it may be, the pacifist Mr. Russell thinks even war as 
an activity leading to the growth of the individual and condemns it 
only because it results in death and destruction. He would welcome 
milder forms of war for according to him, “Every man needs some kind 
of contest, some sense of resistance overcome, in order to feel that he 
is exercising his faculties”,8 in other words to feel that he is growing.
Of the many reasons urged in support the Indian view of life one 
is that it is chiefly owing to its influence that India alone of all the 
oldest countries has survived to this day. This is a statement that 
is often heard and even from persons whose opinions cannot be too 
easily set aside. With the proof or disproof however of this statement 
I do not wish to concern myself. Granting the fact of survival I mean 
to make a statement yet more important. It is this; there are many 
modes of survival and not all are equally commendable. For instance, 
mobility to beat a timely retreat may allow weaker varieties of people 
to survive. So the capacity to grovel or lie low may equally as the 
power of rising to the occasion be the condition of the survival of a 
people. Consequently, it cannot be granted—as is usually supposed—
that because a people have survived through ages that therefore they 
have been growing and improving through ages. Thus it is not survival 
but the quality, the plane of survival, that is important. If the Indian 
readers of Mr. Russell probe into the quality of their survival and 
not remain contented merely with having survived I feel confident 
that they will be convinced of the necessity of a revaluation of their 
values of life.
This much for Mr. Russell’s outlook towards the philosophy of war. 
We will now turn to his analysis of the effects of property. Mr. Russell 
passes in review the various existing economic organizations of society, 
the social ills they produce and the remedies put forth. His critique is 
summarized by himself as follows:
“The evils of present system result from the separation between the 
several interests of consumer, producer and capitalist. No one of these 
three has the same interests as the community or as either of the other 
two. The co-operative system amalgamates the interests of consumer and
8. Principles of Social Reconstruction, p. 96.
