144
 
DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES
fellowship for one’s own kith and kin and anti-fellowship for those who are 
not one’s own kith and kin. It is a feeling of “consciousness of kind ” which 
on the one hand, binds together those who have it so strongly that it over-
rides all differences arising out of economic conflicts or social gradations 
and, on the other, severs them from those who are not of their kind. It is 
a longing not to belong to any other group.
The existence of this fellow-feeling is the foundation of a stable and 
democratic State.
This is one reason why a linguistic State is so essential. But there are 
other reasons why a State should be unilingual. There are two other reasons 
why the rule “one State, one language ” is necessary.
One reason is that democracy cannot work without friction unless there 
is fellow-feeling among those who constitute the State. Faction fights for 
leadership and discrimination in administration are factors ever present in 
a mixed State and are incompatible with democracy.
The present State of Bombay is the best illustration of the failure of 
democracy in a mixed State. I am amazed at the suggestion made by the 
States Reorganization Commission that the present Bombay State should 
be continued as it is to enable us to gain experience of how a mixed State 
flourishes. With Bombay as a mixed State for the last 20 years, with the 
intense enmity between the Maharashtrians and Gujaratis, only a thoughtless 
or an absent-minded person could put forth such a senseless proposal. The 
former State of Madras is another illustration of the failure of democracy 
in a mixed State. The formation of a mixed State of United India and the 
compulsory division of India into India and Pakistan are other illustrations 
of the impossibility of having democracy in a mixed State.
Another reason why it is necessary to adopt the rule of “one State, one 
language” is that it is the only solvent to racial and cultural conflicts.
Why do Tamils hate Andhras and Andhras hate Tamils ? Why do Andhras 
in Hyderabad hate Maharashtrians and Maharashtrians hate Andhras ? Why 
do Gujaratis hate Maharashtrians and Maharashtrians hate Gujaratis ? The 
answer is very simple. It is not because there is any natural antipathy between 
the two. The hatred is due to the fact that they are put in juxtaposition and 
forced to take part in a common cycle of participation, such as Government. 
There is no other answer.
So long as this enforced juxtaposition remains, there will be no peace 
between the two.
There will be people who would cite the cases of Canada, Switzerland 
and South Africa. It is true that these cases of bilingual States exist. But 
it must not be forgotten that the genius of India is quite different from the 
genius of Canada, Switzerland and South Africa. The genius of India is to 
divide—the genius of Switzerland, South Africa and Canada is to unite.
