NEED FOR CHECKS AND BALANCES
133
the merger of the Indian States was under consideration during the making 
of the Constitution. Only those Indian States which were viable were 
allowed to remain as independent States. All others were merged into the 
neighbouring States.
A Sahara ?
Is the proposed Andhra State a viable State ? Mr. Justice Wanchoo had 
very candidly admitted that the annual revenue deficit of the proposed Andhra 
State will be of the magnitude of Rs. 5 crores. It is possible for the proposed 
Andhra State to reduce this gap either by increase of taxation or decrease in 
expenditure ? The Andhras must face this question. Is the Centre going to 
take the responsibility of meeting this deficit ? If so, will this responsibility 
be confined to the proposed Andhra State or will it be extended to all similar 
cases ? These are questions which are to be considered.
The new Andhra State has no fixed capital. I might incidently say 
that I have never heard of the creation of a State without a capital. 
Mr. Rajagopalachari (the staunchest Tamilian tribesman) will not show the 
Government of the proposed Andhra State the courtesy of allowing it to 
stay in Madras city even for one night—courtesy which is prescribed by the 
Hindu Dharma on all Hindus for an atithi. The new Government is left to 
choose its own habitat and construct thereon its own hutments to transact 
its business. What place can it choose ? With what can it construct its 
hutments ? Andhra is Sahara and there are no oases in it. If it chooses some 
place in this Sahara it is bound to shift its quarters to a more salubrious 
place, and the money spent on this temporary headquarters would be all a 
waste. Has the Government considered this aspect of the case ? Why not 
right now give them a place which has the possibility of becoming their 
permanent capital.
It seems to me that Warangal is best suited from this point of view. It 
is the ancient capital of the Andhras. It is a railway junction. It has got 
quite a large number of buildings. It is true that it lies within that part of 
Andhra which is part of Hyderabad State. As a matter of principle Hyderabad 
State which is a monstrocity should have been broken up and a complete 
Andhra State might have been created. But if the Prime Minister has some 
conscientious objection to the proposal, can he not create an enclave in the 
Andhra part of Hyderabad and join it to the new Andhra State and make a 
way to Warangal ? An enclave is not a new thing in India. But the Prime 
Minister wants to work against the will of God in Hyderabad as well as in 
Kashmir. I am sure he will very soon learn the consequences of it.
First Condition
This is just incidental. My main point is that a linguistic State must 
be viable. This is the first consideration in the creation of a linguistic 
State. The second consideration is to note what is likely to happen within
