221
 
RANADE, GANDHI AND JINNAH
among husbands and fathers to desert their families and children. Public 
conscience there was none, and in the absence of conscience it was futile to 
expect moral indignation against the social wrongs. Indeed the Brahmins 
were engaged in defending every wrong for the simple reason that they lived 
on them. They defended Untouchability which condemned millions to the lot 
of the helot. They defended caste, they defended female child marriage and 
they defended enforced widowhood—the two great props of the Caste system. 
They defended the burning of widows, and they defended the social system 
of graded inequality with its rule of hypergamy which led the Rajputs to 
kill in their thousands the daughters that were born to them. What shames! 
What wrongs! Can such a society show its face before civilized nations ? 
Can such a society hope to survive ? Such were the questions which Ranade 
asked. He concluded that on only one condition it could be saved—namely, 
rigorous social reform.
VI
His greatest opponents however came from the political school of the 
intelligentsia. These politicals developed a new thesis. According to that thesis 
political reform was to have precedence over social reform. The thesis was 
argued from platform to platform and was defended by eminent people like 
Mr. Justice Telang, a Judge of the Bombay High Court, with the consummate 
skill of an acute lawyer. The thesis caught the imagination of the people. 
If there was one single cause to which the blocking of the Social Reform 
movement could be attributed, it was this cry of political reform. The thesis 
is unsupportable, and I have no doubt that the opponents of Ranade were 
wrong and in pursuing it did not serve the best interests of the country. 
The grounds on which Mr. Justice Telang defended the Politicians’ thesis 
were of course logical. But he totally forgot that logic is not reason, and 
analogy is not argument. Neither did he have a correct understanding of the 
inter-relation between the “social” and the “political” which Ranade had. Let 
us examine the reasons for the thesis. Those that were advanced were not 
very impressive. But I am prepared to meet the most impressive arguments 
that could be advanced. Even then the thesis will not stand. The following 
strike me as being the most impressive. In the first place, it could be said 
that we want political power first because we want to protect the rights of 
the people. This answer proceeds from a very frugal theory of Government 
as was propounded by the American statesman Jefferson according to whom 
politics was only an affair of policing by the State so that that the rights 
of people were maintained without disturbance. Assume that the theory is 
a sound one. The question is, what is there for the State to police if there 
are no rights ? Rights must exist before policing becomes a serious matter 
of substance. The thesis that political reform should precede social reform 
becomes on the face of it an absurd proposition, unless the idea is that the 
Government is to protect those who have vested rights and to penalize those
