237
 
RANADE, GANDHI AND JINNAH
Government run by a single party is to let democracy become a mere 
form for despotism to play its part from behind it. How under one party 
Government the tyranny of the majority ceases to be an empty phrase 
and becomes a menacing fact has been our experience, in India, under 
the Congress Regime. Were we not told by Mr. Rajgopalachariar that the 
separation of the Executive and the Judiciary which was necessary under 
the British is no longer necessary ? Does it not show the Despot’s taste for 
blood ? Despotism does not cease to be despotism because it is elective. Nor 
does despotism become agreeable because the Despots belong to our own 
kindred. To make it subject to election is no guarantee against despotism. 
The real guarantee against despotism is to confront it with the possibility 
of its dethronement, of its being laid low, of its being superseded by a rival 
party. Every Government is liable to error of judgment, great many liable 
to bad administration and not a few to corruption, injustice and acts of 
oppression and bad faith. No Government ought to be free from criticism. 
But who can criticize a Government ? Left to individuals it can never be 
done. Sir Toby has left behind advice as to how one should deal with one’s 
enemy. He said : “soon, so soon as ever thou seest him, draw, and as thou 
drawest, swear horrible” But this is not possible for an individual who 
wants to stand up against a Government. There are various things against 
individuals successfully playing that part. There is in the first place what 
Bryce calls the fatalism of the multitude, that tendency to acquiesce and 
submit due to the sense of insignificance of individual effort, the sense of 
helplessness arising from the belief that the affairs of men are swayed by 
large forces whose movements cannot be turned by individual effort. In 
the second place there is possibility of the tyranny of the majority which 
often manifests in suppressing and subjecting to penalties and other social 
disabilities persons who do not follow the majority, of which some of us have 
good experience during the Congress regime. In the third place there is the 
fear of the C.I.D. The Gestapo and all the other instrumentalities which are 
at the disposal of the Government to shadow its critics and to silence them.
The secret of freedom is courage, and courage is born in combination 
of individuals into a party. A party is necessary to run Government. But 
two parties are necessary to keep Government from being a despotism. A 
democratic Government can remain democratic only if it is worked by two 
parties—a party in power and a party in opposition. As Jennings puts it :
“If there is no opposition there is no democracy. ‘His Majesty’s Opposition’ 
is no idle phrase. His Majesty needs an opposition as well as a Government.”
In the light of these considerations who could deny that the collapse of 
the Liberal Party in India is not a major disaster ? Without the resusciation 
of the Liberal Party or the formation of another party the fight for freedom
