333
 
FEDERATION VERSUS FREEDOM
connection with the exercise of the functions of the Crown in its relations 
with Indian States, shall, as from the commencement of Part III of this Act. 
have effect as if it had been made on behalf of His Majesty and references 
in any such contract to the Secretary of State in Council shall be construed 
accordingly.”
This section gives statutory form to the contention put forward by 
the Princes before the Butler Committee and accepted by them, that the 
treaties of the Indian States were with the Crown of England as such and 
not with the Government of India.
The next step is to note what follows from this theory. Now what follows 
from this theory is very crucial, but has been unfortunately allowed to 
pass without due care and attention. The Princes have contended that as 
treaty relations of the Indian States are with the Crown of England, the 
duty and responsibility of fulfilling the obligations arising under those 
treaties lay solely upon the Crown of England and the Crown of England 
must at all times maintain itself in a position to fulfil those obligations.
What is the obligation which the treaties with the Princes impose upon 
the Crown of England ? The Principle of obligation imposed upon the Crown 
of England and which the Crown of England has undertaken by the treaties 
is to protect the Princes from internal commotion and external aggression.
How can the Crown fulfil this obligation ? The only way, it is argued, 
that the Crown can fulfil this obligation is to reserve external affairs and 
the Army under its exclusive control.
You can now understand why I say that the necessity of reserved 
subjects is due to a legal necessity. That legal necessity flows from the 
treaty obligations of the Crown and so long as the basis of the treaty 
relations remains what Section 180 says it is, the reserved subjects cannot 
become transferred subjects. And as the reserved subjects cannot become 
transferred, there is no scope even for Responsible Government much less 
for Dominion Status.
From the analysis I have made of the Constitution, from the stand-
point of the ultimate goal, few, I believe, will have any hesitation to say 
that this Constitution is a fixed and rigid constitution. It cannot change 
and therefore it cannot progress. It is a constitution which is striken at 
the very base and it is for the people of India to consider whether they 
will accept it.
I have examined the Constitution from the stand-point of our goal at 
so considerable a length that I feel I owe you an apology for tiring you. 
But the attitude of some people towards this question must be my excuse
