208
 
PREFACE
two reasons. In the first place, the comparison was not sufficiently 
full and detailed to do justice to the two men ; in the second 
place, when the difficulties of finding enough paper compelled me 
to sacrifice some portion of the address this appeared to be best 
offering.
The publication of the address is taking place under peculiar 
circumstances. Ordinarily reviews follow publication. In this case 
the situation is reversed. What is worse is that the reviews have 
condemned the address in scathing terms. This is a matter primarily 
for the publishers to worry about. I am happy that the publisher 
knows the risk and he takes it. Nothing more need be said about 
it except that it supports the view taken by my friends that the 
address contains matter which is of more than ephemeral value. As 
for myself I am not in the least perturbed by the condemnation of 
this address by the Press. What is the ground for its condemnation ? 
And who has come forward to condemn it ?
I am condemned because I criticized Mr. Gandhi and 
Mr. Jinnah for the mess they have made of Indian politics, and 
that in doing so I am alleged to have shown towards them hatred 
and disrespect. In reply to this charge what I have to say is that 
I have been a critic and I must continue to be such. It may be 
I am making mistakes but I have always felt that it is better to 
make mistakes than to accept guidance and direction from others 
or to sit silent and allow things to deteriorate. Those who have 
accused me of having been actuated by feelings of hatred forget 
two things. In the first place this alleged hatred is not born of 
anything that can be called personal. If I am against them it is 
because I want a settlement. I want a settlement of some sort 
and I am not prepared to wait for an ideal settlement. Nor can 
I tolerate anyone on whose will and consent settlement depends 
to stand on dignity and play the Grand Moghul. In the second 
place, no one can hope to make any effective mark upon his time 
and bring the aid that is worth bringing to great principles and 
struggling causes if he is not strong in his love and his hatred. 
I hate injustice, tyranny, pompousness and humbug, and my 
hatred embraces all those who are guilty of them. I want to tell 
my critics that I regard my feelings of hatred as a real force. 
They are only the reflex of the love I bear for the causes I believe
