MR. RUSSELL AND 
THE RECONSTRUCTION OF SOCIETY
The “Principles of Social Reconstruction”1 by the Honourable Mr. Bertrand 
Russell is a war book. Bellicose literature, on the whole, is either propagandist 
or preventive. Mr. Russell’s book, though it falls under the latter, must be 
distinguished from the rest of the same class. Of the preventive books some 
argue against the unnatural geographical barriers within which have been 
impounded some unwilling nations by their masterful conquerors : others like 
Mr. Angell’s Great Illusion, attempt to show that in the calculus of war loss 
prevails over gain even to the victor. Mr. Russell’s however, is a diagnosis, 
altogether different. Wars, he believes, cannot be banished by rationalistic 
appeals such as above, “It is not by reason alone” he says “that wars can 
be prevented but by a positive life of impulses and passions antagonistic to 
those that lead to war. It is the life of impulse that needs to be changed, 
not only the life of conscious thought”.2 As his diagnosis is different so is 
his social philosophy. To him, “the chief thing to be learned through the 
war has been a certain view of the springs of human action what they are, 
and what we may legitimately hope that they will become. This view, if 
it is true, seems to afford a basis for political philosophy more capable of 
standing erect in a time of crisis than the philosophy of traditional liberalism 
has shown itself to be.”3
In consonance with this attitude he adopts the standpoint of the 
behaviouristic psychology.4 A most important contribution of this new 
development in the Science of Psychology consists in a novel view of the 
springs of human action. It has overthrown the doctrine that external
1. London: George Allen and Unwin Ltd. 1917, 6/—net.
2. Principles of Social Reconstruction, p. 13.
3. Ibid:, p. 9.
4. Readers of Mr. Russell will do well to aquaint themselves with Prof. E. L. Thorndike’s 
“Educational Psychology”, Vol. I, “On the Original Nature of Man”.
