360
 
DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES
if the Constitution is framed by Indians for Indians and with the voluntary 
consent of Indians. If the Constitution is imposed by the British Government 
and is not accepted by one section and is opposed by another, there will 
arise in the country an element, hostile to the Constitution, and which will 
devote its energies not to working the Constitution but to breaking it. The 
anti-Constitution party may look upon destroying the Constitution as its 
only duty and may engage itself in “pronouncing” against a party working 
the Constitution in the real Latin American fashion.
It is useless for the British to frame a Constitution for India which they 
will not remain to enforce. The same result will ensue if the Constitution is 
imposed by one powerful section or a combination of such sections on other 
sections. I am, therefore, firmly of opinion that if Indians want Dominion 
Status, they cannot escape the responsibility of framing their own Constitution. 
The position is thus inescapable.
III
CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY
The second question that I wish to raise is : Should there be a Constituent 
Assembly, charged with the function of making a Constitution ? Constituent 
Assembly is on the lips of everybody. The Congress parties in their 
resolutions, passed before the Congress ministries resigned, demanded 
that the Constitution for India should be made by a Constituent Assembly 
composed of Indians. A Constituent Assembly was included in the Cripps 
proposals. The Sapru Committee has followed suit.
I must state that I am wholly opposed to the proposals of a Constituent 
Assembly. It is absolutely superfluous. I regard it as a most dangerous 
project, which may involve this country in a Civil War. In the first place, 
I do not see why a Constituent Assembly is at all necessary. Indians are 
not in the same position as the Fathers of the American Constitution 
were, when they framed the Constitution of the United States. They had 
to evolve ideas, suitable for the constitution for a free people. They had 
no constitutional patterns before them to draw upon. This cannot however 
be the case for Indians. Constitutional ideas and constitutional forms are 
ready at hand. Again, room for variety is very small. There are not more 
than two or three constitutional patterns to choose from. Thirdly, there are 
hardly any big and purely constitutional questions about which there can be 
said to be much dispute among Indians. It is agreed that the future Indian 
Constitution should be Federal. It is also more or less settled what subjects 
should go to the Centre and what to the Provinces. There is no quarrel 
over the division of Revenues between the Centre and the Provinces, none 
on Franchise and none on the relation of the Judiciary to the Legislature 
and the Executive. The only point of dispute, which is outstanding, centres 
round the question of the residuary powers—whether they should be 
with the Centre or with the Provinces. But that is hardly a matter worth
