470
 
DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES
the changes in his equipment with which he has to adjust the size 
of his farm, at one point in time he will decide in favour of a small, 
as at another he will decide in favour of a large holding. He would 
therefore be a poor economist who would legally fix the size of the 
holding which in the interest of economic production must be left to 
vary when variation is demanded. By fixing the size of a holding he 
can only make it a large holding but not an economic holding. For an 
economic holding is not a matter of the size of land alone but is a 
matter of the adjustment of a piece of land to the necessary equipment 
for its efficient cultivation.
V
CRITIQUE OF THE REMEDIES
The proposal to enlarge the existing holdings which is brought 
forward as a cure to the ills of our agriculture can be entertained only 
if it is shown that farms have diminshed in size while the agricultural 
stock has increased in amount. Facts regarding the size of farms have 
already been recorded. It only remains to see if the agricultural stock 
has increased- Mr. K. L. Datta in his exhaustive survey says21 :
“178. Most of the Indian witnesses, whom we examined, appeared 
to be under the belief that there has been a decrease in the supply of 
agricultural products, owing to the inefficient tillage of land. It was said 
that land is not now cultivated as carefully and efficiently as before, 
owing to the scarcity and dearness of plough, cattle and labour. In order 
to effect, a saving in the cost of cultivation, cultivators do not also plough 
their lands as often as they did before, and manuring and weeding, as 
also the amount of irrigating where wells are used for the purpose, have 
all been reduced.”
“179. As regards the scarcity of plough cattle………… (the) figures bear 
testimony to the deplorable effects of famine, the inevitable result of which 
has always been to reduce the number of cattle, though the deficiency is 
generally made good in a few years if otherwise favourable. The number 
of plough cattle in the latest year (1908-09) included in the statement 
was lower than in the commencement (1893-94), in some of the circles 
namely Assam, Bundelkhund. Agra Provinces—North and West, Gujarat, 
Deccan, Berar, Madras-North and Madras-West. Although great reliance 
cannot be placed on these statistics, they can be accepted as showing 
that in some areas at any rate there has been a dearth of plough cattle.”
Regarding the existence of capital Mr. Elliot James says :
“The ryots have a keen eye to the results of a good system of farming 
as exhibited on model farms, but they cannot derive much good from
21. Report on the Enquiry into the Rise of Prices in India, 1914, Vol. 1, pp. 66-67, (Italics ours).
