118
 
DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES
the meanest person is never denied egress and regress upon respectful notice 
given and for horses and coaches and the like he may keep as many as he 
pleases and his servants be permitted to wear what arms they please, a thing 
common to all. Nothing is more promoted by us than the free liberty for buying 
and selling which is the load-stone of trade.
“That last thing he asked of having 10 mans of tobacco free of all duties 
is the most difficult thing of all, for the farmers will ask a vast deal to grant 
such a licence, it being a very great profit they make in the sale of 10 mans, 
so that we know not which way this article can be condescended to, but in this 
your Honours can judge better than us.”12
34. In reply on the 26th April, the Surat Council wrote :13 “We observe 
your answer touching the articles proposed by Nima Parakh Bania in order 
to his settlement on Bombay. When we come again to treat with him thereon, 
we hope so to moderate the affair that the island shall not receive any the 
least prejudice thereby and we do not question but wholly to put him by 
his request to 10 mans of tobacco which he would annually receive or bring 
on the island free of all duties.”
POINT (5)
Bombay—an Emporium of India
35. That Bombay is an emporium for the whole of India may be admitted. 
But it is difficult to understand how it can be said that because of this, 
Maharashtra cannot claim Bombay. Every port serves a much larger area 
than the country to which it belongs. No one, on that account, can say 
the country in which the port is situated cannot claim it as a part of its 
territory. Switzerland has no port. It uses either German, Italian or French 
Ports. Can the Swiss therefore deny the right of Germany, Italy or France, 
the territorial rights of their ports. Why then should Maharashtrians be 
denied the right to claim Bombay merely because it serves as a port for 
Provinces other than Maharashtra ? It would be different if the Province of 
Maharashtra were to get a right to close the Port to Non-Maharashtrians. 
Under the constitution, it will not have that right. Consequently, the inclusion 
of Bombay in Maharashtra will not affect the right of non-Maharashtrians 
to use the port as before.
POINT (6)
Gujarathis—owners of Trade and Industry of Bombay
36. It may be granted that the Gujarathis have a monopoly of trade. 
But, as has already been pointed out, this monopoly, they have been able 
to establish because of the profits they were able to make which were the 
result of the privileges given to them by the East India Company on their
12. This is probably new demand made by Nima Parakh.
13. Bombay Gazetteer, Vol. I, p. 77.
