220
 
DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES
a paltry few. The tragedy is that they have to be counted in millions, millions 
of Untouchables, millions of Criminal Tribes, millions of Primitive Tribes!! 
One wonders whether the Hindu civilization, is civilization or infamy? This 
is about the ideal. Turn now to the state of things as it existed when Ranade 
came on the scene. It is impossible to realize now the state of degradation 
they had reached when the British came on the scene and with which the 
reformers like Ranade were faced. Let me begin with the condition of the 
intellectual class. The rearing and guiding of a civilization must depend 
upon its intellectual class—upon the lead given by the Brahmins. Under 
the old Hindu Law the Brahmin enjoyed the benefit of the clergy and not 
be hanged even if he was guilty of murder, and the East India Company 
allowed him the privilege till 1817. That is no doubt because he was the 
salt of the Earth. Was there any salt left in him ? His profession had lost 
all its nobility. He had become a pest. The Brahmin systematically preyed 
on society and profiteered in religion. The Puranas and Shastras which 
he manufactured in tons are treasure trove of sharp practices which the 
Brahmins employed to befool, beguile and swindle the common mass of 
poor, illiterate and superstitious Hindus. It is impossible in this address to 
give references to them. I can only refer to the coercive measures which the 
Brahmins had sanctified as proper to be employed against the Hindus to the 
encashment of their rights and privileges. Let those who want to know read 
the preamble to Regulation XXI of 1795. According to it whenever a Brahmin 
wanted to get anything which could not be willingly got from his victim, he 
resorted to various coercive practices—lacerating his own body with knives 
and razors or threatening to swallows some poison were the usual tricks he 
practised to carry out his selfish purposes. There were other ways employed 
by the Brahmin to coerce the Hindus which were as extraordinary as they 
were shameless. A common practice was the erection in front of the house 
of his victim of the koorh—a circular enclosure in which a pile of wood was 
placed—within the enclosure an old woman was placed ready to be burnt 
in the koorh if his object was not granted. The second devise of such a 
kind was the placing of his women and children in the sight of his victim 
and threaten to behead them. The third was the Dhurna—starving on the 
doorstep of the victim. This is nothing. Brahmins had started making claims 
for a right to deflower the women of non-Brahmins. The practice prevailed 
in the family of the Zamorin of Calicut and among the Vallabhachari sect of 
Vaishnavas. What depths of degradation the Brahmins had fallen to ! If, as 
the Bible says, the salt has lost its flavour wherewith shall it be salted ? No 
wonder the Hindu Society had its moral bonds loosened to a dangerous point. 
The East India Company had in 1819 to pass a Regulation (VII of 1819) to 
put a stop to this moral degeneracy. The preamble to the Regulation says 
that women were employed wholesale to entice and take away the wives 
or female children for purposes of prostitution, and it was common practice
