316
 
DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES
States ? If they are not States with sovereignty why are they allowed to join 
the federation ? If they are not States with sovereignty and if the sovereignty 
is with the Crown, why has the Crown not transferred its sovereignty to 
the Federation in respect of these territories ? What will be the ultimate 
destiny of such excluded States? Will these be merged in some Indian States 
or will these be merged in some Indian Provinces? I mention all this, firstly 
because I want to show that this Federation is not an All India Federation 
and secondly because I want to draw attention to the move of some Indian 
States to get these excluded States to merge into them.
A second question may be raised. Will this Federation help to unite the 
people of British India and the Indian States into one nation ?
A Federation is necessarily a composite body. Within it are units which are 
smaller political communities. Above the units is a larger political community 
called the Federation. Whether these different political communities will 
remain merely political associations or whether they will develop a common 
social fabric leading ultimately to the formation of a nation will depend upon 
what form their association takes. As Bryce points out— 
“When within a large political community smaller communities are found 
existing, the relation of the smaller to the larger usually appears in one or other 
of the two following forms. One form is that of the League, in which a number 
of political bodies, be they monarchies or republics are bound together so as 
to constitute for certain purposes, and especially for the purpose of common 
defence, a single body. The members of such a composite body or league are not 
individual men but communities. It exists only as an aggregate of communities, 
and will therefore vanish so soon as the communities which compose it separate 
themselves from one another. Moreover it deals with and acts upon these 
communities only. With the individual citizen it has nothing to do, no right of 
taxing him, or judging him, or making laws for him, for in all these matters 
it is to his own community that his allegiance is due.
“In the second form, the smaller communities are mere sub-divisions of that 
greater one which we call a nation. They have been created, or at any rate 
they exist, for administrative purposes only. Such powers as they possess are 
powers delegated by the nation, and can be overridden by its will. The nation 
acts directly by its own officers, not merely on the communities, but upon every 
single citizen and the nation, because it is independent of these communities, 
would continue to exist were they all to disappear ………….”.
The former is the case where the form of Government is a confederation. 
The latter is the case where there exists a unitary form of Government. A 
Federal Government is between the two. It must not however be assumed 
that nationalism is compatible only with a Unitary Government and
