263
 
EVIDENCE BEFORE THE SOUTHBOROUGH COMMITTEE
Arithmetic, Geometry or Logic, but by a wide outlook. He saw no harm as to 
a compromise that while numbers should be the main factor in determining 
the extent of representation modifying causes might influence the number of 
representatives.” It is therefore proposed that the untouchables of the Bombay 
Presidency should be allowed to elect 9 members through the constituencies 
made up as above. These 9 members will further form a constituency to 
elect one member from among themselves to represent the untouchables 
in the Imperial Legislative Council leaving 8 members to represent the 
untouchables in the Bombay Legislative Council.
32. Besides communal electorates there are other schemes in the field for 
the representation of the untouchables. It would not be proper to close this 
statement without a word of comment on those Schemes.
33. The Congress has denied communal representation except in the case of 
Mohammedans and it also denies the extensive use of nomination ; the only 
way then left, open to the untouchables is to fight in a general electorate. 
Now this is as it should be if all were equally free to fight. To educate the 
untouchables by Shahtras into pro-touchables and the touchables into anti-
untouchables and then to propose that the two should fight out at an open 
poll is to betray signs of mental aberration or a mentality fed on cunning. 
But it must never be forgotten that the Congress is largely composed of men 
who are by design political Radicals and social Tories. Their chant is that 
the social and the political are two distinct things having no bearing on each 
other. To them the social and the political are two suits and can be worn 
one at a time as the season demands. Such a psychology has to be laughed 
at because it is too interested to be seriously taken into consideration either 
for acceptance or for rejection. As it pays to believe in it, it will die a hard 
death. Starting from this unnatural premise the Congress activities have 
been quite natural. Those who attend the Congress do not care to attend 
the National Social Conference held in the same pandal. In fact those who 
attend the Congress had once started a campaign to refuse the use of the 
pandal to the Conference which was once refused the pandal in the city 
of Poona, the roosting place of the intelligentia of our Presidency, As the 
Congress is a non-national or anti-national body, its views on communal 
electorates are worthy of no serious consideration.
34. The moderates in their separate meeting have been more kindly than 
just. They proposed the reservation of seats for backward communities in 
plural constituencies. They have not specified the number of seats for the 
untouchables. But the general sense of many enlightened moderates and 
others kindly inclined is that one or two representatives of the untouchables 
in the Legislative Council would suffice. It is impossible to agree with these 
gentlemen though they are entitled to gratitude for this much sympathy. 
One or two representatives of the untouchables are as good as having none.
