 
MAHARASHTRA AS A LINGUISTIC PROVINCE
113
Karnatak Province. If the unbroken territory between Daman and Karwar is 
geographically part of Maharashtra, how could Bombay be held not to be a 
part of Maharashtra ? This is an incontrovertible fact of nature. Geography 
has made Bombay part of Maharashtra. Let those who want to challenge 
the fact of nature do so. To an unbiassed mind it is conclusive proof that 
Bombay belongs to Maharashtra.
Bombay and the Maratha Empire
28. That the Marathas did not care to make it a part of their Empire 
does in no way affect the validity of the conclusion drawn from geography. 
That the Marathas did not care to conquer it does not prove that Bombay 
is not a part of Maharashtra. It only means that the Maratha power was a 
land power and did not therefore care to spend its energy in the conquest 
of a seaport.
29. With the decision on Points (1) and (2), the burden must now shift on 
those who contended that Bombay should not be included in Maharashtra. 
Have they discharged the burden ? This leads to the consideration of other 
points.
POINT (3)
Marathi-speaking population—majority or minority
30. There is no unanimity on this question. Prof. Gadgil speaking for 
the inclusion of Bombay in Maharashtra asserts that the Marathi-speaking 
population of Bombay according to the census of 1941 is 51 per cent. 
Speaking against the inclusion of Bombay, Prof. Gheewala says that the 
Marathi-speaking population of Bombay is 41 per cent. Prof. Vakil has 
brought it down to 39 per cent, which he regards as a very liberal estimate. 
I have not had time to check up these figures and I understand that the 
Census of Bombay does not render much help in arriving at a precise figure. 
However, if one reads the reasons assigned by Prof. Vakil, one would find 
his conclusion to be speculative if not wishful thinking. But assuming that 
the figures given by Prof. Vakil are correct, what of it ? What conclusion 
can be drawn from it ? Does it defeat the claim of Maharashtra to include 
Bombay ? Ever since the British became the masters of India, India has been 
one country with a right to free movement from place to place. If people 
from all parts of India were allowed to come to Bombay and settle there, 
why should the Maharashtrians suffer ? It is not their fault. The present 
state of the population cannot therefore be a ground for excluding Bombay 
from Maharashtra.
POINT (4)
Are Gujarathis Natives of Bombay ?
31. Let us however fully consider the question. Are the Gujarathis 
natives of Bombay ? If they are not, how did they come to Bombay ? What
